

===== PAGE 1 =====

 
 Search:  Submit Search Search
 Home  Encyclopedia  Summa  Fathers  Bible  Library  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z 
Home > Fathers of the Church > On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
On the Incarnation of the Word
Please help support the mission of New Advent and get the full contents of this website as an instant download. Includes the Catholic Encyclopedia,Church Fathers, Summa, Bible and more — all for only $19.99...
1. Introductory.— The subject of this treatise: the humiliation and incarnation of the Word.Presupposes the doctrine of Creation, and that by the Word. The Father has saved the world byHim through Whom he ﬁrst made it.
Whereas in what precedes we have drawn out — choosing a few points from among many — a sufﬁcient account of the error of the heathenconcerning idols, and of the worship of idols, and how they originally came to be invented; how, namely, out of wickedness men devised forthemselves the worshipping of idols: and whereas we have by God's grace noted somewhat also of the divinity of the Word of the Father, and of Hisuniversal Providence and power, and that the Good Father through Him orders all things, and all things are moved by Him, and in Him are quickened:come now, Macarius (worthy of that name), and true lover of Christ, let us follow up the faith of our religion , and set forth also what relates to theWord's becoming Man, and to His divine Appearing among us, which Jews traduce and Greeks laugh to scorn, but we worship; in order that, all themore for the seeming low estate of the Word, your piety toward Him may be increased and multiplied. 2. For the more He is mocked among theunbelieving, the more witness does He give of His own Godhead; inasmuch as He not only Himself demonstrates as possible what men mistake,thinking impossible, but what men deride as unseemly, this by His own goodness He clothes with seemliness, and what men, in their conceit ofwisdom, laugh at as merely human, He by His own power demonstrates to be divine, subduing the pretensions of idols by His supposed humiliation— by the Cross — and those who mock and disbelieve invisibly winning over to recognise His divinity and power. 3. But to treat this subject it isnecessary to recall what has been previously said; in order that you may neither fail to know the cause of the bodily appearing of the Word of theFather, so high and so great, nor think it a consequence of His own nature that the Saviour has worn a body; but that being incorporeal by nature, andWord from the beginning, He has yet of the loving-kindness and goodness of His own Father been manifested to us in a human body for oursalvation. 4. It is, then, proper for us to begin the treatment of this subject by speaking of the creation of the universe, and of God its Artiﬁcer, that soit may be duly perceived that the renewal of creation has been the work of the self-same Word that made it at the beginning. For it will appear notinconsonant for the Father to have wrought its salvation in Him by Whose means He made it.
WHEN IS A MEAL more than a meal?
GIVE NOW
2. Erroneous views of Creation rejected. (1) Epicurean (fortuitous generation). But diversity ofbodies and parts argues a creating intellect. (2.) Platonists (pre-existent matter.) But this subjectsGod to human limitations, making Him not a creator but a mechanic. (3) Gnostics (an alienDemiurge). Rejected from Scripture.
Of the making of the universe and the creation of all things many have taken different views, and each man has laid down the law just as he pleased.For some say that all things have come into being of themselves, and in a chance fashion; as, for example, the Epicureans, who tell us in their self-
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 1/22

===== PAGE 2 =====

contempt, that universal providence does not exist, speaking right in the face of obvious fact and experience. 2. For if, as they say, everything has hadits beginning of itself, and independently of purpose, it would follow that everything had come into mere being, so as to be alike and not distinct. Forit would follow in virtue of the unity of body that everything must be sun or moon, and in the case of men it would follow that the whole must behand, or eye, or foot. But as it is this is not so. On the contrary, we see a distinction of sun, moon, and earth; and again, in the case of human bodies,of foot, hand, and head. Now, such separate arrangement as this tells us not of their having come into being of themselves, but shows that a causepreceded them; from which cause it is possible to apprehend God also as the Maker and Orderer of all.
3. But others, including Plato, who is in such repute among the Greeks, argue that God has made the world out of matter previously existing andwithout beginning. For God could have made nothing had not the material existed already; just as the wood must exist ready at hand for the carpenter,to enable him to work at all.
4. But in so saying they know not that they are investing God with weakness. For if He is not Himself the cause of the material, but makes things onlyof previously existing material, He proves to be weak, because unable to produce anything He makes without the material; just as it is without doubt aweakness of the carpenter not to be able to make anything required without his timber. For, ex hypothesi, had not the material existed, God would nothave made anything. And how could He in that case be called Maker and Artiﬁcer, if He owes His ability to make to some other source — namely, tothe material? So that if this be so, God will be on their theory a Mechanic only, and not a Creator out of nothing ; if, that is, He works at existingmaterial, but is not Himself the cause of the material. For He could not in any sense be called Creator unless He is Creator of the material of whichthe things created have in their turn been made.
5. But the sectaries imagine to themselves a different artiﬁcer of all things, other than the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in deep blindness even as tothe words they use.
6. For whereas the Lord says to the Jews : “Have you not read that from the beginning He which created them made them male and female, and said,For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall become one ﬂesh?” and then, referring to theCreator, says, “What, therefore, God has joined together let not man put asunder:” how come these men to assert that the creation is independent ofthe Father? Or if, in the words of John, who says, making no exception, “All things John 1:3 were made by Him,” and “without Him was not anythingmade,” how could the artiﬁcer be another, distinct from the Father of Christ?
3. The true doctrine. Creation out of nothing, of God's lavish bounty of being. Man createdabove the rest, but incapable of independent perseverance. Hence the exceptional and supra-natural gift of being in God's Image, with the promise of bliss conditionally upon hisperseverance in grace.
Thus do they vainly speculate. But the godly teaching and the faith according to Christ brands their foolish language as godlessness. For it knows thatit was not spontaneously, because forethought is not absent; nor of existing matter, because God is not weak; but that out of nothing, and without itshaving any previous existence, God made the universe to exist through His word, as He says ﬁrstly through Moses: “In Genesis 1:1 the beginningGod created the heaven and the earth;” secondly, in the most edifying book of the Shepherd, “First of all believe that God is one, which created andframed all things, and made them to exist out of nothing.” 2. To which also Paul refers when he says, “By Hebrews 11:3 faith we understand that theworlds have been framed by the Word of God, so that what is seen has not been made out of things which do appear.” 3. For God is good, or rather isessentially the source of goodness: nor could one that is good be niggardly of anything: whence, grudging existence to none, He has made all thingsout of nothing by His own Word, Jesus Christ our Lord. And among these, having taken special pity, above all things on earth, upon the race of men,and having perceived its inability, by virtue of the condition of its origin, to continue in one stay, He gave them a further gift, and He did not barelycreate man, as He did all the irrational creatures on the earth, but made them after His own image, giving them a portion even of the power of Hisown Word; so that having as it were a kind of reﬂexion of the Word, and being made rational, they might be able to abide ever in blessedness, livingthe true life which belongs to the saints in paradise. 4. But knowing once more how the will of man could sway to either side, in anticipation Hesecured the grace given them by a law and by the spot where He placed them. For He brought them into His own garden, and gave them a law: sothat, if they kept the grace and remained good, they might still keep the life in paradise without sorrow or pain or care besides having the promise ofincorruption in heaven; but that if they transgressed and turned back, and became evil, they might know that they were incurring that corruption indeath which was theirs by nature: no longer to live in paradise, but cast out of it from that time forth to die and to abide in death and in corruption. 5.Now this is that of which Holy Writ also gives warning, saying in the Person of God: “Of every tree that is in the garden, eating you shall eat: but ofthe tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall not eat of it, but on the day that you eat, dying you shall die.” But by “dying you shall die,” whatelse could be meant than not dying merely, but also abiding ever in the corruption of death?
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 2/22

===== PAGE 3 =====

4. Our creation and God's Incarnation most intimately connected. As by the Word man wascalled from non-existence into being, and further received the grace of a divine life, so by the onefault which forfeited that life they again incurred corruption and untold sinand misery ﬁlled theworld.
You are wondering, perhaps, for what possible reason, having proposed to speak of the Incarnation of the Word, we are at present treating of theorigin of mankind. But this, too, properly belongs to the aim of our treatise. 2. For in speaking of the appearance of the Saviour among us, we mustneeds speak also of the origin of men, that you may know that the reason of His coming down was because of us, and that our transgression calledforth the loving-kindness of the Word, that the Lord should both make haste to help us and appear among men. 3. For of His becoming Incarnate wewere the object, and for our salvation He dealt so lovingly as to appear and be born even in a human body. 4. Thus, then, God has made man, andwilled that he should abide in incorruption; but men, having despised and rejected the contemplation of God, and devised and contrived evil forthemselves (as was said in the former treatise), received the condemnation of death with which they had been threatened; and from thenceforth nolonger remained as they were made, but were being corrupted according to their devices; and death had the mastery over them as king. Romans 5:14For transgression of the commandment was turning them back to their natural state, so that just as they have had their being out of nothing, so also, asmight be expected, they might look for corruption into nothing in the course of time. 5. For if, out of a former normal state of non-existence, theywere called into being by the Presence and loving-kindness of the Word, it followed naturally that when men were bereft of the knowledge of Godand were turned back to what was not (for what is evil is not, but what is good is), they should, since they derive their being from God who IS, beeverlastingly bereft even of being; in other words, that they should be disintegrated and abide in death and corruption. 6. For man is by nature mortal,inasmuch as he is made out of what is not; but by reason of his likeness to Him that is (and if he still preserved this likeness by keeping Him in hisknowledge) he would stay his natural corruption, and remain incorrupt; as Wisdom Wisdom 6:18 says: “The taking heed to His laws is the assuranceof immortality;” but being incorrupt, he would live henceforth as God, to which I suppose the divine Scripture refers, when it says: “I have said youare gods, and you are all sons of the most Highest; but you die like men, and fall as one of the princes.”
5. For God has not only made us out of nothing; but He gave us freely, by the Grace of theWord, a life in correspondence with God. But men, having rejected things eternal, and, bycounsel of the devil, turned to the things of corruption, became the cause of their owncorruption in death, being, as I said before, by nature corruptible, but destined, by thegracefollowing from partaking of the Word, to have escaped their natural state, had theyremained good.
2. For because of the Word dwelling with them, even their natural corruption did not come near them, as Wisdom also says : “God made man forincorruption, and as an image of His own eternity; but by envy of the devil death came into the world.” But when this had come to pass, men began todie, while corruption thence-forward prevailed against them, gaining even more than its natural power over the whole race, inasmuch as it had, owingto the transgression of the commandment, the threat of the Deity as a further advantage against them.
3. For even in their misdeeds men had not stopped short at any set limits; but gradually pressing forward, have passed on beyond all measure: havingto begin with been inventors of wickedness and called down upon themselves death and corruption; while later on, having turned aside to wrong andexceeding all lawlessness, and stopping at no one evil but devising all manner of new evils in succession, they have become insatiable in sinning. 4.For there were adulteries everywhere and thefts, and the whole earth was full of murders and plunderings. And as to corruption and wrong, no heedwas paid to law, but all crimes were being practised everywhere, both individually and jointly. Cities were at war with cities, and nations were risingup against nations; and the whole earth was rent with civil commotions and battles; each man vying with his fellows in lawless deeds. 8. Nor wereeven crimes against nature far from them, but, as the Apostle and witness of Christ says: “For their women changed the natural use into that which isagainst nature: and likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the women, burned in their lust one toward another, men with men workingunseemliness, and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet.”
6. The human race then was wasting, God's image was being effaced, and His work ruined.Either, then, God must forego His spoken word by which man had incurred ruin; or that whichhad shared in the being of the Word must sink back again into destruction, in which case God'sdesign would be defeated. What then? Was God's goodness to suffer this? But if so, why had manbeen made? It could have been weakness, not goodness on God's part.
For this cause, then, death having gained upon men, and corruption abiding upon them, the race of man was perishing; the rational man made inGod's image was disappearing, and the handiwork of God was in process of dissolution. 2. For death, as I said above, gained from that time forth alegal Genesis 2:15 hold over us, and it was impossible to evade the law, since it had been laid down by God because of the transgression, and theresult was in truth at once monstrous and unseemly. 3. For it were monstrous, ﬁrstly, that God, having spoken, should prove false — that, when onceHe had ordained that man, if he transgressed the commandment, should die the death, after the transgression man should not die, but God's wordshould be broken. For God would not be true, if, when He had said we should die, man died not. 4. Again, it were unseemly that creatures once maderational, and having partaken of the Word, should go to ruin, and turn again toward non-existence by the way of corruption. 5. For it were not worthyof God's goodness that the things He had made should waste away, because of the deceit practised on men by the devil. 6. Especially it was unseemlyto the last degree that God's handicraft among men should be done away, either because of their own carelessness, or because of the deceitfulness ofevil spirits.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 3/22

===== PAGE 4 =====

7. So, as the rational creatures were wasting and such works in course of ruin, what was God in His goodness to do? Suffer corruption to prevailagainst them and death to hold them fast? And where were the proﬁt of their having been made, to begin with? For better were they not made, thanonce made, left to neglect and ruin. 8. For neglect reveals weakness, and not goodness on God's part — if, that is, He allows His own work to beruined when once He had made it — more so than if He had never made man at all. 9. For if He had not made them, none could impute weakness; butonce He had made them, and created them out of nothing, it were most monstrous for the work to be ruined, and that before the eyes of the Maker. 10.It was, then, out of the question to leave men to the current of corruption; because this would be unseemly, and unworthy of God's goodness.
7. On the other hand there was the consistency of God's nature, not to be sacriﬁced for ourproﬁt. Were men, then, to be called upon to repent? But repentance cannot avert the execution ofa law; still less can it remedy a fallen nature. We have incurred corruption and need to berestored to the Grace of God's Image. None could renew but He Who had created. He alonecould (1) recreate all, (2) suffer for all, (3) represent all to the Father.
But just as this consequence must needs hold, so, too, on the other side the just claims of God lie against it: that God should appear true to the law Hehad laid down concerning death. For it were monstrous for God, the Father of truth, to appear a liar for our proﬁt and preservation. 2. So here, oncemore, what possible course was God to take? To demand repentance of men for their transgression? For this one might pronounce worthy of God; asthough, just as from transgression men have become set towards corruption, so from repentance they may once more be set in the way ofincorruption. 3. But repentance would, ﬁrstly, fail to guard the just claim of God. For He would still be none the more true, if men did not remain inthe grasp of death; nor, secondly, does repentance call men back from what is their nature — it merely stays them from acts of sin. 4. Now, if therewere merely a misdemeanour in question, and not a consequent corruption, repentance were well enough. But if, when transgression had once gaineda start, men became involved in that corruption which was their nature, and were deprived of the grace which they had, being in the image of God,what further step was needed? Or what was required for such grace and such recall, but the Word of God, which had also at the beginning madeeverything out of nought? 5. For His it was once more both to bring the corruptible to incorruption, and to maintain intact the just claim of the Fatherupon all. For being Word of the Father, and above all, He alone of natural ﬁtness was both able to recreate everything, and worthy to suffer on behalfof all and to be ambassador for all with the Father.
8. The Word, then, visited that earth in which He was yet always present ; and saw all these evils.He takes a body of our Nature, and that of a spotless Virgin, in whose womb He makes it Hisown, wherein to reveal Himself, conquer death, and restore life.
For this purpose, then, the incorporeal and incorruptible and immaterial Word of God comes to our realm, howbeit he was not far from us Acts 17:27before. For no part of Creation is left void of Him: He has ﬁlled all things everywhere, remaining present with His own Father. But He comes incondescension to show loving-kindness upon us, and to visit us. 2. And seeing the race of rational creatures in the way to perish, and death reigningover them by corruption; seeing, too, that the threat against transgression gave a ﬁrm hold to the corruption which was upon us, and that it wasmonstrous that before the law was fulﬁlled it should fall through: seeing, once more, the unseemliness of what had come to pass: that the thingswhereof He Himself was Artiﬁcer were passing away: seeing, further, the exceeding wickedness of men, and how little by little they had increased itto an intolerable pitch against themselves: and seeing, lastly, how all men were under penalty of death: He took pity on our race, and had mercy onour inﬁrmity, and condescended to our corruption, and, unable to bear that death should have the mastery — lest the creature should perish, and HisFather's handiwork in men be spent for nought — He takes unto Himself a body, and that of no different sort from ours. 3. For He did not simply willto become embodied, or will merely to appear. For if He willed merely to appear, He was able to effect His divine appearance by some other andhigher means as well. But He takes a body of our kind, and not merely so, but from a spotless and stainless virgin, knowing not a man, a body cleanand in very truth pure from intercourse of men. For being Himself mighty, and Artiﬁcer of everything, He prepares the body in the Virgin as a templeunto Himself, and makes it His very own as an instrument, in it manifested, and in it dwelling. 4. And thus taking from our bodies one of like nature,because all were under penalty of the corruption of death He gave it over to death in the stead of all, and offered it to the Father — doing this,moreover, of His loving-kindness, to the end that, ﬁrstly, all being held to have died in Him, the law involving the ruin of men might be undone(inasmuch as its power was fully spent in the Lord's body, and had no longer holding-ground against men, his peers), and that, secondly, whereas menhad turned toward corruption, He might turn them again toward incorruption, and quicken them from death by the appropriation of His body and bythe grace of the Resurrection, banishing death from them like straw from the ﬁre.
9. The Word, since death alone could stay the plague, took a mortal body which, united with Him,should avail for all, and by partaking of His immortalitystay the corruption of the Race. By beingabove all, He made His Flesh an offering for our souls; by being one with us all, he clothed uswith immortality. Simile to illustrate this.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 4/22

===== PAGE 5 =====

For the Word, perceiving that no otherwise could the corruption of men be undone save by death as a necessary condition, while it was impossible forthe Word to suffer death, being immortal, and Son of the Father; to this end He takes to Himself a body capable of death, that it, by partaking of theWord Who is above all, might be worthy to die in the stead of all, and might, because of the Word which had come to dwell in it, remainincorruptible, and that thenceforth corruption might be stayed from all by the Grace of the Resurrection. Whence, by offering unto death the body HeHimself had taken, as an offering and sacriﬁce free from any stain, straightway He put away death from all His peers by the offering of an equivalent.2. For being over all, the Word of God naturally by offering His own temple and corporeal instrument for the life of all satisﬁed the debt by His death.And thus He, the incorruptible Son of God, being conjoined with all by a like nature, naturally clothed all with incorruption, by the promise of theresurrection. For the actual corruption in death has no longer holding-ground against men, by reason of the Word, which by His one body has come todwell among them. 3. And like as when a great king has entered into some large city and taken up his abode in one of the houses there, such city is atall events held worthy of high honour, nor does any enemy or bandit any longer descend upon it and subject it; but, on the contrary, it is thoughtentitled to all care, because of the king's having taken up his residence in a single house there: so, too, has it been with the Monarch of all. 4. For nowthat He has come to our realm, and taken up his abode in one body among His peers, henceforth the whole conspiracy of the enemy against mankindis checked, and the corruption of death which before was prevailing against them is done away. For the race of men had gone to ruin, had not the Lordand Saviour of all, the Son of God, come among us to meet the end of death.
10. By a like simile, the reasonableness of the work of redemption is shown. How Christ wipedaway our ruin, and provided its antidote by His own teaching. Scripture proofs of theIncarnation of the Word, and of the Sacriﬁce He wrought.
Now in truth this great work was peculiarly suited to God's goodness. 1. For if a king, having founded a house or city, if it be beset by bandits fromthe carelessness of its inmates, does not by any means neglect it, but avenges and reclaims it as his own work, having regard not to the carelessness ofthe inhabitants, but to what beseems himself; much more did God the Word of the all-good Father not neglect the race of men, His work, going tocorruption: but, while He blotted out the death which had ensued by the offering of His own body, He corrected their neglect by His own teaching,restoring all that was man's by His own power. 2. And of this one may be assured at the hands of the Saviour's own inspired writers, if one happenupon their writings, where they say: “For the love of Christ 2 Corinthians 5:14 constrains us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then alldied, and He died for all that we should no longer live unto ourselves, but unto Him Who for our sakes died and rose again,” our Lord Jesus Christ.And, again: “But we behold Him, Who has been made a little lower than the angels, even Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned with gloryand honour, that by the grace of God He should taste of death for every man.” 3. Then He also points out the reason why it was necessary for noneother than God the Word Himself to become incarnate; as follows: “For it became Him, for Whom are all things, and through Whom are all things, inbringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through suffering;” by which words He means, that it belonged to noneother to bring man back from the corruption which had begun, than the Word of God, Who had also made them from the beginning. 4. And that it wasin order to the sacriﬁce for bodies such as His own that the Word Himself also assumed a body, to this, also, they refer in these words : “Forasmuchthen as the children are the sharers in blood and ﬂesh, He also Himself in like manner partook of the same, that through death He might bring tonaught Him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and might deliver them who, through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject tobondage.” 5. For by the sacriﬁce of His own body, He both put an end to the law which was against us, and made a new beginning of life for us, bythe hope of resurrection which He has given us. For since from man it was that death prevailed over men, for this cause conversely, by the Word ofGod being made man has come about the destruction of death and the resurrection of life; as the man which bore Christ says: “For since by man camedeath, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive:” and so forth. For no longernow do we die as subject to condemnation; but as men who rise from the dead we await the general resurrection of all, “which 1 Timothy 6:15 in itsown times He shall show,” even God, Who has also wrought it, and bestowed it upon us. 6. This then is the ﬁrst cause of the Saviour's being mademan. But one might see from the following reasons also, that His gracious coming among us was ﬁtting to have taken place.
11. Second reason for the Incarnation. God, knowing that man was not by nature sufﬁcient toknowHim, gave him, in order that he might have some proﬁt in being, a knowledge of Himself.He made them in the Image of the Word, that thus they might knowthe Word, and through Himthe Father. Yet man, despising this, fell into idolatry, leaving the unseen God for magic andastrology; and all this in spite of God's manifold revelation of Himself.
God, Who has the power over all things, when He was making the race of men through His own Word, seeing the weakness of their nature, that it wasnot sufﬁcient of itself to know its Maker, nor to get any idea at all of God; because while He was uncreate, the creatures had been made of nought,and while He was incorporeal, men had been fashioned in a lower way in the body, and because in every way the things made fell far short of beingable to comprehend and know their Maker — taking pity, I say, on the race of men, inasmuch as He is good, He did not leave them destitute of theknowledge of Himself, lest they should ﬁnd no proﬁt in existing at all. 2. For what proﬁt to the creatures if they knew not their Maker? Or how couldthey be rational without knowing the Word (and Reason) of the Father, in Whom they received their very being? For there would be nothing todistinguish them even from brute creatures if they had knowledge of nothing but earthly things. Nay, why did God make them at all, as He did notwish to be known by them? 3. Whence, lest this should be so, being good, He gives them a share in His own Image, our Lord Jesus Christ, and makesthem after His own Image and after His likeness: so that by such grace perceiving the Image, that is, the Word of the Father, they may be able throughHim to get an idea of the Father, and knowing their Maker, live the happy and truly blessed life. 4. But men once more in their perversity having set atnought, in spite of all this, the grace given them, so wholly rejected God, and so darkened their soul, as not merely to forget their idea of God, but alsoto fashion for themselves one invention after another. For not only did they grave idols for themselves, instead of the truth, and honour things that
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 5/22

===== PAGE 6 =====

were not before the living God, “and serve the creature rather than the Creator,” but, worst of all, they transferred the honour of God even to stocksand stones and to every material object and to men, and went even further than this, as we have said in the former treatise. 5. So far indeed did theirimpiety go, that they proceeded to worship devils, and proclaimed them as gods, fulﬁlling their own lusts. For they performed, as was said above,offerings of brute animals, and sacriﬁces of men, as was meet for them , binding themselves down all the faster under their maddening inspirations. 6.For this reason it was also that magic arts were taught among them, and oracles in various places led men astray, and all men ascribed the inﬂuencesof their birth and existence to the stars and to all the heavenly bodies, having no thought of anything beyond what was visible. 7. And, in a word,everything was full of irreligion and lawlessness, and God alone, and His Word, was unknown, albeit He had not hidden Himself out of men's sight,nor given the knowledge of Himself in one way only; but had, on the contrary, unfolded it to them in many forms and by many ways.
12. For though man was created in grace, God, foreseeing his forgetfulness, provided also theworks of creation to remind man of him. Yet further, He ordained a Law and Prophets, whoseministry was meant for all the world. Yet men heeded only their own lusts.
For whereas the grace of the Divine Image was in itself sufﬁcient to make known God the Word, and through Him the Father; still God, knowing theweakness of men, made provision even for their carelessness: so that if they cared not to know God of themselves, they might be enabled through theworks of creation to avoid ignorance of the Maker. 2. But since men's carelessness, little by little, descends to lower things, God made provision, oncemore, even for this weakness of theirs, by sending a law, and prophets, men such as they knew, so that even if they were not ready to look up toheaven and know their Creator, they might have their instruction from those near at hand. For men are able to learn from men more directly abouthigher things. 3. So it was open to them, by looking into the height of heaven, and perceiving the harmony of creation, to know its Ruler, the Word ofthe Father, Who, by His own providence over all things makes known the Father to all, and to this end moves all things, that through Him all mayknow God. 4. Or, if this were too much for them, it was possible for them to meet at least the holy men, and through them to learn of God, the Makerof all things, the Father of Christ; and that the worship of idols is godlessness, and full of all impiety. 5. Or it was open to them, by knowing the laweven, to cease from all lawlessness and live a virtuous life. For neither was the law for the Jews alone, nor were the Prophets sent for them only, but,though sent to the Jews and persecuted by the Jews, they were for all the world a holy school of the knowledge of God and the conduct of the soul. 6.God's goodness then and loving-kindness being so great — men nevertheless, overcome by the pleasures of the moment and by the illusions anddeceits sent by demons, did not raise their heads toward the truth, but loaded themselves the more with evils and sins, so as no longer to seemrational, but from their ways to be reckoned void of reason.
13. Here again, was God to keep silence? To allow to false gods the worship He made us torender to Himself? A king whose subjects had revolted would, after sending letters andmessages, go to them in person. How much more shall God restore in us the grace of Hisimage. This men, themselves but copies, could not do. Hence the WordHimself must come (1)to recreate, (2) to destroy death in the Body.
So then, men having thus become brutalized, and demoniacal deceit thus clouding every place, and hiding the knowledge of the true God, what wasGod to do? To keep still silence at so great a thing, and suffer men to be led astray by demons and not to know God? 2. And what was the use of manhaving been originally made in God's image? For it had been better for him to have been made simply like a brute animal, than, once made rational,for him to live the life of the brutes. 3. Or where was any necessity at all for his receiving the idea of God to begin with? For if he be not ﬁt to receiveit even now, it were better it had not been given him at ﬁrst. 4. Or what proﬁt to God Who has made them, or what glory to Him could it be, if men,made by Him, do not worship Him, but think that others are their makers? For God thus proves to have made these for others instead of for Himself.5. Once again, a merely human king does not let the lands he has colonized pass to others to serve them, nor go over to other men; but he warns themby letters, and often sends to them by friends, or, if need be, he comes in person, to put them to rebuke in the last resort by his presence, only that theymay not serve others and his own work be spent for naught. 6. Shall not God much more spare His own creatures, that they be not led astray fromHim and serve things of nought? Especially since such going astray proves the cause of their ruin and undoing, and since it was unﬁtting that theyshould perish which had once been partakers of God's image. 7. What then was God to do? Or what was to be done save the renewing of that whichwas in God's image, so that by it men might once more be able to know Him? But how could this have come to pass save by the presence of the veryImage of God, our Lord Jesus Christ? For by men's means it was impossible, since they are but made after an image; nor by angels either, for noteven they are (God's) images. Whence the Word of God came in His own person, that, as He was the Image of the Father, He might be able to createafresh the man after the image. 8. But, again, it could not else have taken place had not death and corruption been done away. 9. Whence He took, innatural ﬁtness, a mortal body, that while death might in it be once for all done away, men made after His Image might once more be renewed. Noneother then was sufﬁcient for this need, save the Image of the Father.
14. A portrait once effaced must be restored from the original. Thus the Son of the Father cameto seek, save, and regenerate. No other way was possible. Blinded himself, man could not see toheal. The witness of creation had failed to preserve him, and could not bring him back. The Wordalone could do so. But how? Only by revealing Himself as Man.
For as, when the likeness painted on a panel has been effaced by stains from without, he whose likeness it is must needs come once more to enablethe portrait to be renewed on the same wood: for, for the sake of his picture, even the mere wood on which it is painted is not thrown away, but theoutline is renewed upon it; 2. in the same way also the most holy Son of the Father, being the Image of the Father, came to our region to renew manonce made in His likeness, and ﬁnd him, as one lost, by the remission of sins; as He says Himself in the Gospels: “I came to ﬁnd and to save the lost.”Whence He said to the Jews also: “Except a man be born again,” not meaning, as they thought, birth from woman, but speaking of the soul born andcreated anew in the likeness of God's image. 3. But since wild idolatry and godlessness occupied the world, and the knowledge of God was hid,whose part was it to teach the world concerning the Father? Man's, might one say? But it was not in man's power to penetrate everywhere beneath the
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 6/22

===== PAGE 7 =====

sun; for neither had they the physical strength to run so far, nor would they be able to claim credence in this matter, nor were they sufﬁcient bythemselves to withstand the deceit and impositions of evil spirits. 4. For where all were smitten and confused in soul from demoniacal deceit, and thevanity of idols, how was it possible for them to win over man's soul and man's mind — whereas they cannot even see them? Or how can a manconvert what he does not see? 5. But perhaps one might say creation was enough; but if creation were enough, these great evils would never havecome to pass. For creation was there already, and all the same, men were grovelling in the same error concerning God. 6. Who, then, was needed,save the Word of God, that sees both soul and mind, and that gives movement to all things in creation, and by them makes known the Father? For Hewho by His own Providence and ordering of all things was teaching men concerning the Father, He it was that could renew this same teaching aswell. 7. How, then, could this have been done? Perhaps one might say, that the same means were open as before, for Him to show forth the truth aboutthe Father once more by means of the work of creation. But this was no longer a sure means. Quite the contrary; for men missed seeing this before,and have turned their eyes no longer upward but downward. 8. Whence, naturally, willing to proﬁt men, He sojourns here as man, taking to Himself abody like the others, and from things of earth, that is by the works of His body [He teaches them], so that they who would not know Him from HisProvidence and rule over all things, may even from the works done by His actual body know the Word of God which is in the body, and through Himthe Father.
15. Thus the Word condescended to man's engrossment in corporeal things, by even taking abody. All man's superstitions He met halfway; whether men were inclined to worship Nature,Man, Demons, or the dead, He showed Himself Lord of all these.
For as a kind teacher who cares for His disciples, if some of them cannot proﬁt by higher subjects, comes down to their level, and teaches them at anyrate by simpler courses; so also did the Word of God. As Paul also says: “For seeing 1 Corinthians 1:21 that in the wisdom of God the world throughits wisdom knew not God, it was God's good pleasure through the foolishness of the word preached to save them that believe.” 2. For seeing that men,having rejected the contemplation of God, and with their eyes downward, as though sunk in the deep, were seeking about for God in nature and in theworld of sense, feigning gods for themselves of mortal men and demons; to this end the loving and general Saviour of all, the Word of God, takes toHimself a body, and as Man walks among men and meets the senses of all men half-way , to the end, I say, that they who think that God is corporealmay from what the Lord effects by His body perceive the truth, and through Him recognize the Father. 3. So, men as they were, and human in all theirthoughts, on whatever objects they ﬁxed their senses, there they saw themselves met half-way , and taught the truth from every side. 4. For if theylooked with awe upon the Creation, yet they saw how she confessed Christ as Lord; or if their mind was swayed toward men, so as to think themgods, yet from the Saviour's works, supposing they compared them, the Saviour alone among men appeared Son of God; for there were no suchworks done among the rest as have been done by the Word of God. 5. Or if they were biassed toward evil spirits, even, yet seeing them cast out by theWord, they were to know that He alone, the Word of God, was God, and that the spirits were none. 6. Or if their mind had already sunk even to thedead, so as to worship heroes, and the gods spoken of in the poets, yet, seeing the Saviour's resurrection, they were to confess them to be false gods,and that the Lord alone is true, the Word of the Father, that was Lord even of death. 7. For this cause He was both born and appeared as Man, anddied, and rose again, dulling and casting into the shade the works of all former men by His own, that in whatever direction the bias of men might be,from thence He might recall them, and teach them of His own true Father, as He Himself says: “I came to save and to ﬁnd that which was lost. ”
16. He came then to attract man's sense-bound attention to Himself as man, and so to lead himon to knowHim as God.
For men's mind having ﬁnally fallen to things of sense, the Word disguised Himself by appearing in a body, that He might, as Man, transfer men toHimself, and centre their senses on Himself, and, men seeing Him thenceforth as Man, persuade them by the works He did that He is not Man only,but also God, and the Word and Wisdom of the true God. 2. This, too, is what Paul means to point out when he says: “That ye being rooted andgrounded in love, may be strong to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length, and height and depth, and to know the love of Christwhich passes knowledge, that you may be ﬁlled unto all the fullness of God.” 3. For by the Word revealing Himself everywhere, both above andbeneath, and in the depth and in the breadth — above, in the creation; beneath, in becoming man; in the depth, in Hades; and in the breadth, in theworld — all things have been ﬁlled with the knowledge of God. 4. Now for this cause, also, He did not immediately upon His coming accomplish Hissacriﬁce on behalf of all, by offering His body to death and raising it again, for by this means He would have made Himself invisible. But He madeHimself visible enough by what He did, abiding in it, and doing such works, and showing such signs, as made Him known no longer as Man, but asGod the Word. 5. For by His becoming Man, the Saviour was to accomplish both works of love; ﬁrst, in putting away death from us and renewing usagain; secondly, being unseen and invisible, in manifesting and making Himself known by His works to be the Word of the Father, and the Ruler andKing of the universe.
17. How the Incarnation did not limit the ubiquity of the Word, nor diminish His Purity. (Simileof the Sun.)
For He was not, as might be imagined, circumscribed in the body, nor, while present in the body, was He absent elsewhere; nor, while He moved thebody, was the universe left void of His working and Providence; but, thing most marvellous, Word as He was, so far from being contained byanything, He rather contained all things Himself; and just as while present in the whole of Creation, He is at once distinct in being from the universe,and present in all things by His own power — giving order to all things, and over all and in all revealing His own providence, and giving life to eachthing and all things, including the whole without being included, but being in His own Father alone wholly and in every respect —2. thus, even whilepresent in a human body and Himself quickening it, He was, without inconsistency, quickening the universe as well, and was in every process ofnature, and was outside the whole, and while known from the body by His works, He was none the less manifest from the working of the universe aswell. 3. Now, it is the function of soul to behold even what is outside its own body, by acts of thought, without, however, working outside its ownbody, or moving by its presence things remote from the body. Never, that is, does a man, by thinking of things at a distance, by that fact either moveor displace them; nor if a man were to sit in his own house and reason about the heavenly bodies, would he by that fact either move the sun or makethe heavens revolve. But he sees that they move and have their being, without being actually able to inﬂuence them. 4. Now, the Word of God in Hisman's nature was not like that; for He was not bound to His body, but rather was Himself wielding it, so that He was not only in it, but was actually ineverything, and while external to the universe, abode in His Father only. 5. And this was the wonderful thing that He was at once walking as man, and
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 7/22

===== PAGE 8 =====

as the Word was quickening all things, and as the Son was dwelling with His Father. So that not even when the Virgin bore Him did He suffer anychange, nor by being in the body was [His glory] dulled: but, on the contrary, He sanctiﬁed the body also. 6. For not even by being in the universedoes He share in its nature, but all things, on the contrary, are quickened and sustained by Him. 7. For if the sun too, which was made by Him, andwhich we see, as it revolves in the heaven, is not deﬁled by touching the bodies upon earth, nor is it put out by darkness, but on the contrary itselfilluminates and cleanses them also, much less was the all-holy Word of God, Maker and Lord also of the sun, deﬁled by being made known in thebody; on the contrary, being incorruptible, He quickened and cleansed the body also, which was in itself mortal: “who 1 Peter 2:22 did,” for so it says,“no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth.”
18. How the Word and Power of God works in His human actions: by casting out devils, byMiracles, by His Birth of the Virgin.
Accordingly, when inspired writers on this matter speak of Him as eating and being born, understand that the body, as body, was born, and sustainedwith food corresponding to its nature, while God, the Word Himself, Who was united with the body, while ordering all things, also by the works Hedid in the body showed Himself to be not man, but God the Word. But these things are said of Him, because the actual body which ate, was born, andsuffered, belonged to none other but to the Lord: and because, having become man, it was proper for these things to be predicated of Him as man, toshow Him to have a body in truth, and not in seeming. 2. But just as from these things He was known to be bodily present, so from the works He didin the body He made Himself known to be Son of God. Whence also He cried to the unbelieving Jews; “If I do not the works of My Father, believeMe not. But if I do them, though you believe not Me, believe My works; that you may know and understand that the Father is in Me, and I in theFather.” 3. For just as, though invisible, He is known through the works of creation; so, having become man, and being in the body unseen, it may beknown from His works that He Who can do these is not man, but the Power and Word of God. 4. For His charging evil spirits, and their being drivenforth, this deed is not of man, but of God. Or who that saw Him healing the diseases to which the human race is subject, can still think Him man andnot God? For He cleansed lepers, made lame men to walk, opened the hearing of deaf men, made blind men to see again, and in a word drove awayfrom men all diseases and inﬁrmities: from which acts it was possible even for the most ordinary observer to see His Godhead. For who that saw Himgive back what was deﬁcient to men born lacking, and open the eyes of the man blind from his birth, would have failed to perceive that the nature ofmen was subject to Him, and that He was its Artiﬁcer and Maker? For He that gave back that which the man from his birth had not, must be, it issurely evident, the Lord also of men's natural birth. 5. Therefore, even to begin with, when He was descending to us, He fashioned His body forHimself from a Virgin, thus to afford to all no small proof of His Godhead, in that He Who formed this is also Maker of everything else as well. Forwho, seeing a body proceeding forth from a Virgin alone without man, can fail to infer that He Who appears in it is Maker and Lord of other bodiesalso? 6. Or who, seeing the substance of water changed and transformed into wine, fails to perceive that He Who did this is Lord and Creator of thesubstance of all waters? For to this end He went upon the sea also as its Master, and walked as on dry land, to afford evidence to them that saw it ofHis lordship over all things. And in feeding so vast a multitude on little, and of His own self yielding abundance where none was, so that from ﬁveloaves ﬁve thousand had enough, and left so much again over, did He show Himself to be any other than the very Lord Whose Providence is over allthings?
19. Man, unmoved by nature, was to be taught to knowGod by that sacred Manhood, Whose deityall nature confessed, especially in His Death.
But all this it seemed well for the Saviour to do; that since men had failed to know His Providence, revealed in the Universe, and had failed toperceive His Godhead shown in creation, they might at any rate from the works of His body recover their sight, and through Him receive an idea ofthe knowledge of the Father, inferring, as I said before, from particular cases His Providence over the whole. 2. For who that saw His power over evilspirits, or who that saw the evil spirits confess that He was their Lord, will hold his mind any longer in doubt whether this be the Son and Wisdomand Power of God? 3. For He made even the creation break silence: in that even at His death, marvellous to relate, or rather at His actual trophy overdeath — the Cross I mean — all creation was confessing that He that was made manifest and suffered in the body was not man merely, but the Son ofGod and Saviour of all. For the sun hid His face, and the earth quaked and the mountains were rent: all men were awed. Now these things showed thatChrist on the Cross was God, while all creation was His slave, and was witnessing by its fear to its Master's presence. Thus, then, God the Wordshowed Himself to men by His works. But our next step must be to recount and speak of the end of His bodily life and course, and of the nature of thedeath of His body; especially as this is the sum of our faith, and all men without exception are full of it: so that you may know that no whit the lessfrom this also Christ is known to be God and the Son of God.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 8/22

===== PAGE 9 =====

20. None, then, could bestow incorruption, but He Who had made, none restore the likeness ofGod, save His Own Image, none quicken, but the Life, none teach, but the Word. And He, to payour debt of death, must also die for us, and rise again as our ﬁrst-fruits from the grave. Mortaltherefore His Body must be; corruptible, His Body could not be.
We have, then, now stated in part, as far as it was possible, and as ourselves had been able to understand, the reason of His bodily appearing; that itwas in the power of none other to turn the corruptible to incorruption, except the Saviour Himself, that had at the beginning also made all things outof nought and that none other could create anew the likeness of God's image for men, save the Image of the Father; and that none other could renderthe mortal immortal, save our Lord Jesus Christ, Who is the Very Life ; and that none other could teach men of the Father, and destroy the worship ofidols, save the Word, that orders all things and is alone the true Only-begotten Son of the Father. 2. But since it was necessary also that the debt owingfrom all should be paid again: for, as I have already said , it was owing that all should die, for which special cause, indeed, He came among us: to thisintent, after the proofs of His Godhead from His works, He next offered up His sacriﬁce also on behalf of all, yielding His Temple to death in thestead of all, in order ﬁrstly to make men quit and free of their old trespass, and further to show Himself more powerful even than death, displayingHis own body incorruptible, as ﬁrst-fruits of the resurrection of all. 3. And do not be surprised if we frequently repeat the same words on the samesubject. For since we are speaking of the counsel of God, therefore we expound the same sense in more than one form, lest we should seem to beleaving anything out, and incur the charge of inadequate treatment: for it is better to submit to the blame of repetition than to leave out anything thatought to be set down. 4. The body, then, as sharing the same nature with all, for it was a human body, though by an unparalleled miracle it wasformed of a virgin only, yet being mortal, was to die also, conformably to its peers. But by virtue of the union of the Word with it, it was no longersubject to corruption according to its own nature, but by reason of the Word that had come to dwell in it it was placed out of the reach of corruption.5. And so it was that two marvels came to pass at once, that the death of all was accomplished in the Lord's body, and that death and corruption werewholly done away by reason of the Word that was united with it. For there was need of death, and death must needs be suffered on behalf of all, thatthe debt owing from all might be paid. 6. Whence, as I said before, the Word, since it was not possible for Him to die, as He was immortal, took toHimself a body such as could die, that He might offer it as His own in the stead of all, and as suffering, through His union with it, on behalf of all,“Bring to nought Him that had the power of death, that is the devil; and might deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject tobondage.”
21. Death brought to nought by the death of Christ. Why then did not Christ die privately, or in amore honourableway? He was not subject to natural death, but had to die at the hands of others.Why then did He die? Nay but for that purpose He came, and but for that, He could not haverisen.
Why, now that the common Saviour of all has died on our behalf, we, the faithful in Christ, no longer die the death as before, agreeably to thewarning of the law; for this condemnation has ceased; but, corruption ceasing and being put away by the grace of the Resurrection, henceforth we areonly dissolved, agreeably to our bodies' mortal nature, at the time God has ﬁxed for each, that we may be able to gain a better resurrection. 2. For likethe seeds which are cast into the earth, we do not perish by dissolution, but sown in the earth, shall rise again, death having been brought to nought bythe grace of the Saviour. Hence it is that blessed Paul, who was made a surety of the Resurrection to all, says: “This corruptible must put onincorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality; but when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put onimmortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is your sting? O grave where isyour victory?” 3. Why, then, one might say, if it were necessary for Him to yield up His body to death in the stead of all, did He not lay it aside asman privately, instead of going as far as even to be cruciﬁed? For it were more ﬁtting for Him to have laid His body aside honourably, thanignominiously to endure a death like this. 4. Now, see to it, I reply, whether such an objection be not merely human, whereas what the Saviour did istruly divine and for many reasons worthy of His Godhead. Firstly, because the death which befalls men comes to them agreeably to the weakness oftheir nature; for, unable to continue in one stay, they are dissolved with time. Hence, too, diseases befall them, and they fall sick and die. But the Lordis not weak, but is the Power of God and Word of God and Very Life. 5. If, then, He had laid aside His body somewhere in private, and upon a bed,after the manner of men, it would have been thought that He also did this agreeably to the weakness of His nature, and because there was nothing inhim more than in other men. But since He was, ﬁrstly, the Life and the Word of God, and it was necessary, secondly, for the death on behalf of all tobe accomplished, for this cause, on the one hand, because He was life and power, the body gained strength in Him; 6. while on the other, as deathmust needs come to pass, He did not Himself take, but received at others' hands; the occasion of perfecting His sacriﬁce. Since it was not ﬁt, either,that the Lord should fall sick, who healed the diseases of others; nor again was it right for that body to lose its strength, in which He gives strength tothe weaknesses of others also. 7. Why, then, did He not prevent death, as He did sickness? Because it was for this that He had the body, and it wasunﬁtting to prevent it, lest the Resurrection also should be hindered, while yet it was equally unﬁtting for sickness to precede His death, lest it shouldbe thought weakness on the part of Him that was in the body. Did He not then hunger? Yes; He hungered, agreeably to the properties of His body. ButHe did not perish of hunger, because of the Lord that wore it. Hence, even if He died to ransom all, yet He saw not corruption. For [His body] roseagain in perfect soundness, since the body belonged to none other, but to the very Life.
22. But why did He not withdraw His body from the Jews, and so guard its immortality? (1) Itbecame Him not to inﬂict death on Himself, and yet not to shun it. (2) He came to receive deathas the due of others, therefore it should come to Him from without. (3) His death must be certain,to guarantee the truth of His Resurrection. Also, He could not die from inﬁrmity, lest He shouldbe mocked in His healing of others.
But it were better, one might say, to have hidden from the designs of the Jews, that He might guard His body altogether from death. Now let such anone be told that this too was unbeﬁtting the Lord. For as it was not ﬁtting for the Word of God, being the Life, to inﬂict death Himself on His ownbody, so neither was it suitable to ﬂy from death offered by others, but rather to follow it up unto destruction, for which reason He naturally neither
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 9/22

===== PAGE 10 =====

laid aside His body of His own accord, nor, again, ﬂed from the Jews when they took counsel against Him. 2. But this did not show weakness on theWord's part, but, on the contrary, showed Him to be Saviour and Life; in that He both awaited death to destroy it, and hasted to accomplish the deathoffered Him for the salvation of all. 3. And besides, the Saviour came to accomplish not His own death, but the death of men; whence He did not layaside His body by a death of His own John 10:17-18 — for He was Life and had none — but received that death which came from men, in orderperfectly to do away with this when it met Him in His own body. 4. Again, from the following also one might see the reasonableness of the Lord'sbody meeting this end. The Lord was especially concerned for the resurrection of the body which He was set to accomplish. For what He was to dowas to manifest it as a monument of victory over death, and to assure all of His having effected the blotting out of corruption, and of the incorruptionof their bodies from thenceforward; as a gage of which and a proof of the resurrection in store for all, He has preserved His own body incorrupt. 5. If,then, once more, His body had fallen sick, and the word had been sundered from it in the sight of all, it would have been unbecoming that He whohealed the diseases of others should suffer His own instrument to waste in sickness. For how could His driving out the diseases of others have beenbelieved Matthew 27:42 in if His own temple fell sick in Him ? For either He had been mocked as unable to drive away diseases, or if He could, butdid not, He would be thought insensible toward others also.
23. Necessity of a public death for the doctrine of the Resurrection.
But even if, without any disease and without any pain, He had hidden His body away privily and by Himself “in Acts 26:26 a corner,” or in a desertplace, or in a house, or anywhere, and afterwards suddenly appeared and said that He had been raised from the dead, He would have seemed on allhands to be telling idle tales Luke 24:11, and what He said about the Resurrection would have been all the more discredited, as there was no one at allto witness to His death. Now, death must precede resurrection, as it would be no resurrection did not death precede; so that if the death of His bodyhad taken place anywhere in secret, the death not being apparent nor taking place before witnesses, His Resurrection too had been hidden and withoutevidence. 2. Or why, while when He had risen He proclaimed the Resurrection, should He cause His death to take place in secret? Or why, while Hedrove out evil spirits in the presence of all, and made the man blind from his birth recover his sight, and changed the water into wine, that by thesemeans He might be believed to be the Word of God, should He not manifest His mortal nature as incorruptible in the presence of all, that He might bebelieved Himself to be the Life? 3. Or how were His disciples to have boldness in speaking of the Resurrection, were they not able to say that He ﬁrstdied? Or how could they be believed, saying that death had ﬁrst taken place and then the Resurrection, had they not had as witnesses of His death themen before whom they spoke with boldness? For if, even as it was, when His death and Resurrection had taken place in the sight of all, the Phariseesof that day would not believe, but compelled even those who had seen the Resurrection to deny it, why, surely, if these things had happened in secret,how many pretexts for disbelief would they have devised? 4. Or how could the end of death, and the victory over it be proved, unless challenging itbefore the eyes of all He had shown it to be dead, annulled for the future by the incorruption of His body?
24. Further objections anticipated. He did not choose His manner of death; for He was to proveConqueror of death in all or any of its forms: (simile of a good wrestler). The death chosen todisgrace Him proved the Trophy against death: moreover it preserved His body undivided.
But what others also might have said, we must anticipate in reply. For perhaps a man might say even as follows: If it was necessary for His death totake place before all, and with witnesses, that the story of His Resurrection also might be believed, it would have been better at any rate for Him tohave devised for Himself a glorious death, if only to escape the ignominy of the Cross. 2. But had He done even this, He would give ground forsuspicion against Himself, that He was not powerful against every death, but only against the death devised for Him; and so again there would havebeen a pretext for disbelief about the Resurrection all the same. So death came to His body, not from Himself, but from hostile counsels, in order thatwhatever death they offered to the Saviour, this He might utterly do away. 3. And just as a noble wrestler, great in skill and courage, does not pick outhis antagonists for himself, lest he should raise a suspicion of his being afraid of some of them, but puts it in the choice of the onlookers, andespecially so if they happen to be his enemies, so that against whomsoever they match him, him he may throw, and be believed superior to them all;so also the Life of all, our Lord and Saviour, even Christ, did not devise a death for His own body, so as not to appear to be fearing some other death;but He accepted on the Cross, and endured, a death inﬂicted by others, and above all by His enemies, which they thought dreadful and ignominiousand not to be faced; so that this also being destroyed, both He Himself might be believed to be the Life, and the power of death be brought utterly tonought. 4. So something surprising and startling has happened; for the death, which they thought to inﬂict as a disgrace, was actually a monument ofvictory against death itself. Whence neither did He suffer the death of John, his head being severed, nor, as Esaias, was He sawn in sunder; in orderthat even in death He might still keep His body undivided and in perfect soundness, and no pretext be afforded to those that would divide the Church.
25. Why the Cross, of all deaths? (1) He had to bear the curse for us. (2) On it He held out Hishands to unite all, Jews and Gentiles, in Himself. (3) He defeated the “Prince of the powers ofthe air” in His own region, clearing the way to heaven and opening for us the everlasting doors.
And thus much in reply to those without who pile up arguments for themselves. But if any of our own people also inquire, not from love of debate,but from love of learning, why He suffered death in none other way save on the Cross, let him also be told that no other way than this was good forus, and that it was well that the Lord suffered this for our sakes. 2. For if He came Himself to bear the curse laid upon us, how else could He have“become Galatians 3:13 a curse,” unless He received the death set for a curse? And that is the Cross. For this is exactly what is written: “CursedDeuteronomy 21:23 is he that hangs on a tree.” 3. Again, if the Lord's death is the ransom of all, and by His death “the middle Ephesians 2:14 wall ofpartition” is broken down, and the calling of the nations is brought about, how would He have called us to Him, had He not been cruciﬁed? For it isonly on the cross that a man dies with his hands spread out. Whence it was ﬁtting for the Lord to bear this also and to spread out His hands, that withthe one He might draw the ancient people, and with the other those from the Gentiles, and unite both in Himself. 4. For this is what He Himself hassaid, signifying by what manner of death He was to ransom all: “I, when John 12:32 I am lifted up,” He says, “shall draw all men unto Me.” 5. Andonce more, if the devil, the enemy of our race, having fallen from heaven, wanders about our lower atmosphere, and there bearing rule over hisfellow-spirits, as his peers in disobedience, not only works illusions by their means in them that are deceived, but tries to hinder them that are goingup (and about this the Apostle says: “According to the prince of the power of the air, of the spirit that now works in the sons of disobedience”); whilethe Lord came to cast down the devil, and clear the air and prepare the way for us up into heaven, as said the Apostle: “Through Hebrews 10:20 theveil, that is to say, His ﬂesh” — and this must needs be by death — well, by what other kind of death could this have come to pass, than by one which
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 10/22

===== PAGE 11 =====

took place in the air, I mean the cross? For only he that is perfected on the cross dies in the air. Whence it was quite ﬁtting that the Lord suffered thisdeath. 6. For thus being lifted up He cleared the air of the malignity both of the devil and of demons of all kinds, as He says: “I beheld Satan aslightning fall from heaven;” and made a new opening of the way up into heaven as He says once more: “Lift up your gates, O you princes, and belifted up, you everlasting doors.” For it was not the Word Himself that needed an opening of the gates, being Lord of all; nor were any of His worksclosed to their Maker; but we it was that needed it whom He carried up by His own body. For as He offered it to death on behalf of all, so by it Heonce more made ready the way up into the heavens.
26. Reasons for His rising on the Third Day. (1) Not sooner for else His real death would bedenied, nor (2) later; to (a) guard the identity of His body, (b) not to keep His disciplestoo long insuspense, nor (c) to wait till the witnesses of His death were dispersed, or its memory faded.
The death on the Cross, then, for us has proved seemly and ﬁtting, and its cause has been shown to be reasonable in every respect; and it may justlybe argued that in no other way than by the Cross was it right for the salvation of all to take place. For not even thus — not even on the Cross — didHe leave Himself concealed; but far otherwise, while He made creation witness to the presence of its Maker, He suffered not the temple of His bodyto remain long, but having merely shown it to be dead, by the contact of death with it, He straightway raised it up on the third day, bearing away, asthe mark of victory and the triumph over death, the incorruptibility and impassibility which resulted to His body. 2. For He could, even immediatelyon death, have raised His body and shown it alive; but this also the Saviour, in wise foresight, did not do. For one might have said that He had notdied at all, or that death had not come into perfect contact with Him, if He had manifested the Resurrection at once. 3. Perhaps, again, had the intervalof His dying and rising again been one of two days only, the glory of His incorruption would have been obscure. So in order that the body might beproved to be dead, the Word tarried yet one intermediate day, and on the third showed it incorruptible to all. 4. So then, that the death on the Crossmight be proved, He raised His body on the third day. 5. But lest, by raising it up when it had remained a long time and been completely corrupted,He should be disbelieved, as though He had exchanged it for some other body — for a man might also from lapse of time distrust what he saw, andforget what had taken place — for this cause He waited not more than three days; nor did He keep long in suspense those whom He had told about theResurrection: 6. but while the word was still echoing in their ears and their eyes were still expectant and their mind in suspense, and while those whohad slain Him were still living on earth, and were on the spot and could witness to the death of the Lord's body, the Son of God Himself, after aninterval of three days, showed His body, once dead, immortal and incorruptible; and it was made manifest to all that it was not from any naturalweakness of the Word that dwelt in it that the body had died, but in order that in it death might be done away by the power of the Saviour.
27. The change wrought by the Cross in the relation of Death to Man.
For that death is destroyed, and that the Cross has become the victory over it, and that it has no more power but is verily dead, this is no small proof,or rather an evident warrant, that it is despised by all Christ's disciples, and that they all take the aggressive against it and no longer fear it; but by thesign of the Cross and by faith in Christ tread it down as dead. 2. For of old, before the divine sojourn of the Saviour took place, even to the saintsdeath was terrible , and all wept for the dead as though they perished. But now that the Saviour has raised His body, death is no longer terrible; for allwho believe in Christ tread him under as nought, and choose rather to die than to deny their faith in Christ. For they verily know that when they diethey are not destroyed, but actually [begin to] live, and become incorruptible through the Resurrection. 3. And that devil that once maliciously exultedin death, now that its pains were loosed, remained the only one truly dead. And a proof of this is, that before men believe Christ, they see in death anobject of terror, and play the coward before him. But when they are gone over to Christ's faith and teaching, their contempt for death is so great thatthey even eagerly rush upon it, and become witnesses for the Resurrection the Saviour has accomplished against it. For while still tender in years theymake haste to die, and not men only, but women also, exercise themselves by bodily discipline against it. So weak has he become, that even womenwho were formerly deceived by him, now mock at him as dead and paralyzed. 4. For as when a tyrant has been defeated by a real king, and boundhand and foot, then all that pass by laugh him to scorn, buffeting and reviling him, no longer fearing his fury and barbarity, because of the king whohas conquered him; so also, death having been conquered and exposed by the Saviour on the Cross, and bound hand and foot, all they who are inChrist, as they pass by, trample on him, and witnessing to Christ scoff at death, jesting at him, and saying what has been written against him of old:“O death , where is your victory? O grave, where is your sting.”
28. This exceptional fact must be tested by experience. Let those who doubtit become Christians.
Is this, then, a slight proof of the weakness of death? Or is it a slight demonstration of the victory won over him by the Saviour, when the youths andyoung maidens that are in Christ despise this life and practise to die? 2. For man is by nature afraid of death and of the dissolution of the body; butthere is this most startling fact, that he who has put on the faith of the Cross despises even what is naturally fearful, and for Christ's sake is not afraidof death. 3. And just as, whereas ﬁre has the natural property of burning, if some one said there was a substance which did not fear its burning, but onthe contrary proved it weak — as the asbestos among the Indians is said to do — then one who did not believe the story, if he wished to put it to thetest, is at any rate, after putting on the ﬁreproof material and touching the ﬁre, thereupon assured of the weakness attributed to the ﬁre: 4. or if any onewished to see the tyrant bound, at any rate by going into the country and domain of his conqueror he may see the man, a terror to others, reduced toweakness; so if a man is incredulous even still after so many proofs and after so many who have become martyrs in Christ, and after the scorn shownfor death every day by those who are illustrious in Christ, still, if his mind be even yet doubtful as to whether death has been brought to nought andhad an end, he does well to wonder at so great a thing, only let him not prove obstinate in incredulity, nor case-hardened in the face of what is soplain. 5. But just as he who has got the asbestos knows that ﬁre has no burning power over it, and as he who would see the tyrant bound goes over tothe empire of his conqueror, so too let him who is incredulous about the victory over death receive the faith of Christ, and pass over to His teaching,and he shall see the weakness of death, and the triumph over it. For many who were formerly incredulous and scoffers have afterwards believed andso despised death as even to become martyrs for Christ Himself.
29. Here then are wonderful effects, and a sufﬁcient cause, the Cross, to account for them, assunrise accounts for daylight.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 11/22

===== PAGE 12 =====

Now if by the sign of the Cross, and by faith in Christ, death is trampled down, it must be evident before the tribunal of truth that it is none other thanChrist Himself that has displayed trophies and triumphs over death, and made him lose all his strength. 2. And if, while previously death was strong,and for that reason terrible, now after the sojourn of the Saviour and the death and Resurrection of His body it is despised, it must be evident thatdeath has been brought to nought and conquered by the very Christ that ascended the Cross. 3. For as, if after night-time the sun rises, and the wholeregion of earth is illumined by him, it is at any rate not open to doubt that it is the sun who has revealed his light everywhere, that has also drivenaway the dark and given light to all things; so, now that death has come into contempt, and been trodden under foot, from the time when the Saviour'ssaving manifestation in the ﬂesh and His death on the Cross took place, it must be quite plain that it is the very Saviour that also appeared in the body,Who has brought death to nought, and Who displays the signs of victory over him day by day in His own disciples. 4. For when one sees men, weakby nature, leaping forward to death, and not fearing its corruption nor frightened of the descent into Hades, but with eager soul challenging it; and notﬂinching from torture, but on the contrary, for Christ's sake electing to rush upon death in preference to life upon earth, or even if one be an eye-witness of men and females and young children rushing and leaping upon death for the sake of Christ's religion; who is so silly, or who is soincredulous, or who so maimed in his mind, as not to see and infer that Christ, to Whom the people witness, Himself supplies and gives to each thevictory over death, depriving him of all his power in each one of them that hold His faith and bear the sign of the Cross. 5. For he that sees the serpenttrodden under foot, especially knowing his former ﬁerceness no longer doubts that he is dead and has quite lost his strength, unless he is perverted inmind and has not even his bodily senses sound. For who that sees a lion, either, made sport of by children, fails to see that he is either dead or has lostall his power? 6. Just as, then, it is possible to see with the eyes the truth of all this, so, now that death is made sport of and despised by believers inChrist let none any longer doubt, nor any prove incredulous, of death having been brought to nought by Christ, and the corruption of death destroyedand stayed.
30. The reality of the resurrection proved by facts: (1) the victory over death described above: (2)the Wonders of Grace are the work of One Living, of One who is God: (3) if the gods be (asalleged) real and living, a fortiori He Who shatters their power is alive.
What we have so far said, then, is no small proof that death has been brought to naught, and that the Cross of the Lord is a sign of victory over him.But of the Resurrection of the body to immortality thereupon accomplished by Christ, the common Saviour and true Life of all, the demonstration byfacts is clearer than arguments to those whose mental vision is sound. 2. For if, as our argument showed, death has been brought to nought, andbecause of Christ all tread him under foot, much more did He Himself ﬁrst tread him down with His own body, and bring him to nought. Butsupposing death slain by Him, what could have happened save the rising again of His body, and its being displayed as a monument of victory againstdeath? Or how could death have been shown to be brought to nought unless the Lord's body had risen? But if this demonstration of the Resurrectionseem to any one insufﬁcient, let him be assured of what is said even from what takes place before his eyes. 3. For whereas on a man's decease he canput forth no power, but his inﬂuence lasts to the grave and thenceforth ceases; and actions, and power over men, belong to the living only; let himwho will, see and be judge, confessing the truth from what appears to sight. 4. For now that the Saviour works so great things among men, and day byday is invisibly persuading so great a multitude from every side, both from them that dwell in Greece and in foreign lands, to come over to His faith,and all to obey His teaching, will any one still hold his mind in doubt whether a Resurrection has been accomplished by the Saviour, and whetherChrist is alive, or rather is Himself the Life? 5. Or is it like a dead man to be pricking the consciences of men, so that they deny their hereditary lawsand bow before the teaching of Christ? Or how, if he is no longer active (for this is proper to one dead), does he stay from their activity those who areactive and alive, so that the adulterer no longer commits adultery, and the murderer murders no more, nor is the inﬂicter of wrong any longergrasping, and the profane is henceforth religious? Or how, if He be not risen but is dead, does He drive away, and pursue, and cast down those falsegods said by the unbelievers to be alive, and the demons they worship? 6. For where Christ is named, and His faith, there all idolatry is deposed andall imposture of evil spirits is exposed, and any spirit is unable to endure even the name, nay even on barely hearing it ﬂies and disappears. But thiswork is not that of one dead, but of one that lives — and especially of God. 7. In particular, it would be ridiculous to say that while the spirits cast outby Him and the idols brought to nought are alive, He who chases them away, and by His power prevents their even appearing, yea, and is beingconfessed by them all to be Son of God, is dead.
31. If Power is the sign of life, what do we learn from the impotence of idols, for good or evil, andthe constraining power of Christ and of the Sign of the Cross? Death and the demonsare by thisproved to have lost their sovereignty. Coincidence of the above argument from facts with thatfrom the Personality of Christ.
But they who disbelieve in the Resurrection afford a strong proof against themselves, if instead of all the spirits and the gods worshipped by themcasting out Christ, Who, they say, is dead, Christ on the contrary proves them all to be dead. 2. For if it be true that one dead can exert no power,while the Saviour does daily so many works, drawing men to religion, persuading to virtue, teaching of immortality, leading on to a desire forheavenly things, revealing the knowledge of the Father, inspiring strength to meet death, showing Himself to each one, and displacing the godlessnessof idolatry, and the gods and spirits of the unbelievers can do none of these things, but rather show themselves dead at the presence of Christ, theirpomp being reduced to impotence and vanity; whereas by the sign of the Cross all magic is stopped, and all witchcraft brought to nought, and all theidols are being deserted and left, and every unruly pleasure is checked, and every one is looking up from earth to heaven: Whom is one to pronouncedead? Christ, that is doing so many works? But to work is not proper to one dead. Or him that exerts no power at all, but lies as it were without life?Which is essentially proper to the idols and spirits, dead as they are. 3. For the Son of God is Hebrews 4:12 “living and active,” and works day byday, and brings about the salvation of all. But death is daily proved to have lost all his power, and idols and spirits are proved to be dead rather thanChrist, so that henceforth no man can any longer doubt of the Resurrection of His body. 4. But he who is incredulous of the Resurrection of the Lord'sbody would seem to be ignorant of the power of the Word and Wisdom of God. For if He took a body to Himself at all, and — in reasonableconsistency, as our argument showed — appropriated it as His own, what was the Lord to do with it? Or what should be the end of the body when theWord had once descended upon it? For it could not but die, inasmuch as it was mortal, and to be offered unto death on behalf of all: for whichpurpose it was that the Saviour fashioned it for Himself. But it was impossible for it to remain dead, because it had been made the temple of life.Whence, while it died as mortal, it came to life again by reason of the Life in it; and of its Resurrection the works are a sign.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 12/22

===== PAGE 13 =====

32. But who is to see Him risen, so as to believe? Nay, God is ever invisible and known by Hisworks only: and here the works cry out in proof. If you do not believe, look at those who do, andperceive the Godhead of Christ. The demonssee this, though men be blind. Summary of theargument so far.
But if, because He is not seen, His having risen at all is disbelieved, it is high time for those who refuse belief to deny the very course of Nature. Forit is God's peculiar property at once to be invisible and yet to be known from His works, as has been already stated above. 2. If, then, the works arenot there, they do well to disbelieve what does not appear. But if the works cry aloud and show it clearly, why do they choose to deny the life somanifestly due to the Resurrection? For even if they be maimed in their intelligence, yet even with the external senses men may see theunimpeachable power and Godhead of Christ. 3. For even a blind man, if he see not the sun, yet if he but take hold of the warmth the sun gives out,knows that there is a sun above the earth. Thus let our opponents also, even if they believe not as yet, being still blind to the truth, yet at leastknowing His power by others who believe, not deny the Godhead of Christ and the Resurrection accomplished by Him. 4. For it is plain that if Christbe dead, He could not be expelling demons and spoiling idols; for a dead man the spirits would not have obeyed. But if they be manifestly expelledby the naming of His name, it must be evident that He is not dead; especially as spirits, seeing even what is unseen by men, could tell if Christ weredead and refuse Him any obedience at all. 5. But as it is, what irreligious men believe not, the spirits see — that He is God — and hence they ﬂy andfall at His feet, saying just what they uttered when He was in the body: “We know You Who You are, the Holy One of God;” and, “Ah, what have weto do with You, Thou Son of God? I pray You, torment me not.” 6. As then demons confess Him, and His works bear Him witness day by day, it mustbe evident, and let none brazen it out against the truth, both that the Saviour raised His own body, and that He is the true Son of God, being from Him,as from His Father, His own Word, and Wisdom, and Power, Who in ages later took a body for the salvation of all, and taught the world concerningthe Father, and brought death to nought, and bestowed incorruption upon all by the promise of the Resurrection, having raised His own body as aﬁrst-fruits of this, and having displayed it by the sign of the Cross as a monument of victory over death and its corruption.
33. Unbelief of Jews and scofﬁng of Greeks. The former confounded by their own Scriptures.Prophecies of His coming as God and as Man.
These things being so, and the Resurrection of His body and the victory gained over death by the Saviour being clearly proved, come now let us putto rebuke both the disbelief of the Jews and the scofﬁng of the Gentiles. 2. For these, perhaps, are the points where Jews express incredulity, whileGentiles laugh, ﬁnding fault with the unseemliness of the Cross, and of the Word of God becoming man. But our argument shall not delay to grapplewith both especially as the proofs at our command against them are clear as day. 3. For Jews in their incredulity may be refuted from the Scriptures,which even themselves read; for this text and that, and, in a word, the whole inspired Scripture, cries aloud concerning these things, as even itsexpress words abundantly show. For prophets proclaimed beforehand concerning the wonder of the Virgin and the birth from her, saying: “Lo, theMatthew 1:23; Isaiah 7:14 Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted,God with us.” 4. But Moses, the truly great, and whom they believe to speak truth, with reference to the Saviour's becoming man, having estimatedwhat was said as important, and assured of its truth, set it down in these words: “There Numbers 24:5-17 shall rise a star out of Jacob, and a man outof Israel, and he shall break in pieces the captains of Moab.” And again: “How lovely are your habitations O Jacob, your tabernacles O Israel, asshadowing gardens, and as parks by the rivers, and as tabernacles which the Lord has ﬁxed, as cedars by the waters. A man shall come forth out of hisseed, and shall be Lord over many peoples.” And again, Esaias: “Before Isaiah 8:4 the Child know how to call father or mother, he shall take thepower of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria before the king of Assyria.” 5. That a man, then, shall appear is foretold in those words. But that Hethat is to come is Lord of all, they predict once more as follows: “Behold Isaiah 19:1 the Lord sits upon a light cloud, and shall come into Egypt, andthe graven images of Egypt shall be shaken.” For from thence also it is that the Father calls Him back, saying: “I called Hosea 11:1 My Son out ofEgypt.”
34. Prophecies of His passionand death in all its circumstances.
Nor is even His death passed over in silence: on the contrary, it is referred to in the divine Scriptures, even exceeding clearly. For to the end that noneshould err for want of instruction in the actual events, they feared not to mention even the cause of His death — that He suffers it not for His ownsake, but for the immortality and salvation of all, and the counsels of the Jews against Him and the indignities offered Him at their hands. 2. They saythen: “A man in stripes, and knowing how to bear weakness, for his face is turned away: he was dishonoured and held in no account. He bears oursins, and is in pain on our account; and we reckoned him to be in labour, and in stripes, and in ill-usage; but he was wounded for our sins, and madeweak for our wickedness. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we were healed.” O marvel at the loving-kindness of theWord, that for our sakes He is dishonoured, that we may be brought to honour. “For all we,” it says, “like sheep had gone astray; man had erred in hisway; and the Lord delivered him for our sins; and he opens not his mouth, because he has been evilly entreated. As a sheep was he brought to theslaughter, and as a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opens he not his mouth: in his abasement his judgment was taken away. ” 3. Then lest any shouldfrom His suffering conceive Him to be a common man, Holy Writ anticipates the surmises of man, and declares the power (which worked) for Him ,and the difference of His nature compared with ourselves, saying: “But who shall declare his generation? For his life is taken away from the earth.From the wickedness of the people was he brought to death. And I will give the wicked instead of his burial, and the rich instead of his death; for hedid no wickedness, neither was guile found in his mouth. And the Lord will cleanse him from his stripes.”
35. Prophecies of the Cross. How these prophecies are satisﬁed in Christ alone.
But, perhaps, having heard the prophecy of His death, you ask to learn also what is set forth concerning the Cross. For not even this is passed over: itis displayed by the holy men with great plainness. 2. For ﬁrst Moses predicts it, and that with a loud voice, when he says: “You shall see your Lifehanging before your eyes, and shall not believe.” 3. And next, the prophets after him witness of this, saying: “But Jeremiah 11:19 I as an innocentlamb brought to be slain, knew it not; they counselled an evil counsel against me, saying, Hither and let us cast a tree upon his bread, and efface himfrom the land of the living.” 4. And again: “They pierced my hands and my feet, they numbered all my bones, they parted my garments among them,and for my vesture they cast lots.” 5. Now a death raised aloft and that takes place on a tree, could be none other than the Cross: and again, in no other
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 13/22

===== PAGE 14 =====

death are the hands and feet pierced, save on the Cross only. 6. But since by the sojourn of the Saviour among men all nations also on every sidebegan to know God; they did not leave this point, either, without a reference: but mention is made of this matter as well in the Holy Scriptures. For“there Isaiah 11:10 shall be,” he says, “the root of Jesse, and he that rises to rule the nations, on him shall the nations hope.” This then is a little inproof of what has happened. 7. But all Scripture teems with refutations of the disbelief of the Jews. For which of the righteous men and holy prophets,and patriarchs, recorded in the divine Scriptures, ever had his corporal birth of a virgin only? Or what woman has sufﬁced without man for theconception of human kind? Was not Abel born of Adam, Enoch of Jared, Noe of Lamech, and Abraham of Tharra, Isaac of Abraham, Jacob of Isaac?Was not Judas born of Jacob, and Moses and Aaron of Ameram? Was not Samuel born of Elkana, was not David of Jesse, was not Solomon of David,was not Ezechias of Achaz, was not Josias of Amos, was not Esaias of Amos, was not Jeremy of Chelchias, was not Ezechiel of Buzi? Had not each afather as author of his existence? Who then is he that is born of a virgin only? For the prophet made exceeding much of this sign. 8. Or whose birthdid a star in the skies forerun, to announce to the world him that was born? For when Moses was born, he was hid by his parents: David was not heardof, even by those of his neighbourhood, inasmuch as even the great Samuel knew him not, but asked, had Jesse yet another son? Abraham againbecame known to his neighbours as a great man only subsequently to his birth. But of Christ's birth the witness was not man, but a star in that heavenwhence He was descending.
36. Prophecies of Christ's sovereignty, ﬂight into Egypt, etc.
But what king that ever was, before he had strength to call father or mother, reigned and gained triumphs over his enemies ? Did not David come tothe throne at thirty years of age, and Solomon, when he had grown to be a young man? Did not Joas enter on the kingdom when seven years old, andJosias, a still later king, receive the government about the seventh year of his age? And yet they at that age had strength to call father or mother. 2.Who, then, is there that was reigning and spoiling his enemies almost before his birth? Or what king of this sort has ever been in Israel and in Juda —let the Jews, who have searched out the matter, tell us — in whom all the nations have placed their hopes and had peace, instead of being at enmitywith them on every side? 3. For as long as Jerusalem stood there was war without respite between them, and they all fought with Israel; the Assyriansoppressed them, the Egyptians persecuted them, the Babylonians fell upon them; and, strange to say, they had even the Syrians their neighbours atwar against them. Or did not David war against them of Moab, and smite the Syrians, Josias guard against his neighbours, and Ezechias quail at theboasting of Senacherim, and Amalek make war against Moses, and the Amorites oppose him, and the inhabitants of Jericho array themselves againstJesus son of Naue? And, in a word, treaties of friendship had no place between the nations and Israel. Who, then, it is on whom the nations are to settheir hope, it is worth while to see. For there must be such an one, as it is impossible for the prophet to have spoken falsely. 4. But which of the holyprophets or of the early patriarchs has died on the Cross for the salvation of all? Or who was wounded and destroyed for the healing of all? Or whichof the righteous men, or kings, went down to Egypt, so that at his coming the idols of Egypt fell ? For Abraham went there, but idolatry prevaileduniversally all the same. Moses was born there, and the deluded worship of the people was there none the less.
37. Psalm 22:16, etc. Majesty of His birth and death. Confusion of oracles and demonsinEgypt.
Or who among those recorded in Scripture was pierced in the hands and feet, or hung at all upon a tree, and was sacriﬁced on a cross for the salvationof all? For Abraham died, ending his life on a bed; Isaac and Jacob also died with their feet raised on a bed; Moses and Aaron died on the mountain;David in his house, without being the object of any conspiracy at the hands of the people; true, he was pursued by Saul, but he was preserved unhurt.Esaias was sawn asunder, but not hung on a tree. Jeremy was shamefully treated, but did not die under condemnation; Ezechie suffered, not howeverfor the people, but to indicate what was to come upon the people. 2. Again, these, even where they suffered, were men resembling all in their commonnature; but he that is declared in Scripture to suffer on behalf of all is called not merely man, but the Life of all, albeit He was in fact like men innature. For “you shall see,” it says, “your Life hanging before your eyes;” and “who shall declare his generation?” For one can ascertain thegenealogy of all the saints, and declare it from the beginning, and of whom each was born; but the generation of Him that is the Life the Scripturesrefer to as not to be declared. 3. Who then is he of whom the Divine Scriptures say this? Or who is so great that even the prophets predict of him suchgreat things? None else, now, is found in the Scriptures but the common Saviour of all, the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ. For He it is thatproceeded from a virgin and appeared as man on the earth, and whose generation after the ﬂesh cannot be declared. For there is none that can tell Hisfather after the ﬂesh, His body not being of a man, but of a virgin alone; 4. so that no one can declare the corporal generation of the Saviour from aman, in the same way as one can draw up a genealogy of David and of Moses and of all the patriarchs. For He it is that caused the star also to markthe birth of His body; since it was ﬁt that the Word, coming down from heaven, should have His constellation also from heaven, and it was ﬁtting thatthe King of Creation when He came forth should be openly recognized by all creation. 5. Why, He was born in Judæa, and men from Persia came toworship Him. He it is that even before His appearing in the body won the victory over His demon adversaries and a triumph over idolatry. All heathenat any rate from every region, abjuring their hereditary tradition and the impiety of idols, are now placing their hope in Christ, and enrollingthemselves under Him, the like of which you may see with your own eyes. 6. For at no other time has the impiety of the Egyptians ceased, save when
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 14/22

===== PAGE 15 =====

the Lord of all, riding as it were upon a cloud, came down there in the body and brought to nought the delusion of idols, and brought over all toHimself, and through Himself to the Father. 7. He it is that was cruciﬁed before the sun and all creation as witnesses, and before those who put Him todeath: and by His death has salvation come to all, and all creation been ransomed. He is the Life of all, and He it is that as a sheep yielded His body todeath as a substitute, for the salvation of all, even though the Jews believe it not.
38. Other clear prophecies of the coming of Godin the ﬂesh. Christ's miraclesunprecedented.
For if they do not think these proofs sufﬁcient, let them be persuaded at any rate by other reasons, drawn from the oracles they themselves possess.For of whom do the prophets say: “I was made manifest to them that sought me not, I was found of them that asked not for me: I said Behold, heream I, to the nation that had not called upon my name; I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people.” 2. Who, then, one might sayto the Jews, is he that was made manifest? For if it is the prophet, let them say when he was hid, afterward to appear again. And what manner ofprophet is this, that was not only made manifest from obscurity, but also stretched out his hands on the Cross? None surely of the righteous, save theWord of God only, Who, incorporeal by nature, appeared for our sakes in the body and suffered for all. 3. Or if not even this is sufﬁcient for them, letthem at least be silenced by another proof, seeing how clear its demonstrative force is. For the Scripture says: “Be strong you hands that hang down,and feeble knees; comfort ye, you of faint mind; be strong, fear not. Behold, our God recompenses judgment; He shall come and save us. Then shallthe eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear; then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the stammerers shall beplain.” 4. Now what can they say to this, or how can they dare to face this at all? For the prophecy not only indicates that God is to sojourn here, but itannounces the signs and the time of His coming. For they connect the blind recovering their sight, and the lame walking, and the deaf hearing, and thetongue of the stammerers being made plain, with the Divine Coming which is to take place. Let them say, then, when such signs have come to pass inIsrael, or where in Jewry anything of the sort has occurred. 5. Naaman, a leper, was cleansed, but no deaf man heard nor lame walked. Elias raised adead man; so did Eliseus; but none blind from birth regained his sight. For in good truth, to raise a dead man is a great thing, but it is not like thewonder wrought by the Saviour. Only, if Scripture has not passed over the case of the leper, and of the dead son of the widow, certainly, had it cometo pass that a lame man also had walked and a blind man recovered his sight, the narrative would not have omitted to mention this also. Since thennothing is said in the Scriptures, it is evident that these things had never taken place before. 6. When, then, have they taken place, save when the Wordof God Himself came in the body? Or when did He come, if not when lame men walked, and stammerers were made to speak plain, and deaf menheard, and men blind from birth regained their sight? For this was the very thing the Jews said who then witnessed it, because they had not heard ofthese things having taken place at any other time: “Since the world began it was never heard that any one opened the eyes of a man born blind. If thisman were not from God, He could do nothing.”
39. Do you look for another? But Daniel foretells the exact time. Objections to this removed.
But perhaps, being unable, even they, to ﬁght continually against plain facts, they will, without denying what is written, maintain that they are lookingfor these things, and that the Word of God is not yet come. For this it is on which they are for ever harping, not blushing to brazen it out in the face ofplain facts. 2. But on this one point, above all, they shall be all the more refuted, not at our hands, but at those of the most wise Daniel, who marksboth the actual date, and the divine sojourn of the Saviour, saying: “Seventy weeks are cut short upon your people, and upon the holy city, for a fullend to be made of sin, and for sins to be sealed up, and to blot out iniquities, and to make atonement for iniquities, and to bring everlastingrighteousness, and to seal vision and prophet, and to anoint a Holy of Holies; and you shall know and understand from the going forth of the word torestore and to build Jerusalem unto Christ the Prince” 3. Perhaps with regard to the other (prophecies) they may be able even to ﬁnd excuses and toput off what is written to a future time. But what can they say to this, or can they face it at all? Where not only is the Christ referred to, but He that isto be anointed is declared to be not man simply, but Holy of Holies; and Jerusalem is to stand till His coming, and thenceforth, prophet and visioncease in Israel. 4. David was anointed of old, and Solomon and Ezechias; but then, nevertheless, Jerusalem and the place stood, and prophets wereprophesying: God and Asaph and Nathan; and, later, Esaias and Osee and Amos and others. And again, the actual men that were anointed were calledholy, and not Holy of Holies. 5. But if they shield themselves with the captivity, and say that because of it Jerusalem was not, what can they say aboutthe prophets too? For in fact when ﬁrst the people went down to Babylon, Daniel and Jeremy were there, and Ezechiel and Aggæus and Zachary wereprophesying.
40. Argument (1) from the withdrawal of prophecyand destruction of Jerusalem, (2) from theconversion of the Gentiles, and that to the God of Moses. What more remains for the Messiah todo, that Christ has not done?
So the Jews are triﬂing, and the time in question, which they refer to the future, is actually come. For when did prophet and vision cease from Israel,save when Christ came, the Holy of Holies? For it is a sign, and an important proof, of the coming of the Word of God, that Jerusalem no longerstands, nor is any prophet raised up nor vision revealed to them — and that very naturally. 2. For when He that was signiﬁed had come, what needwas there any longer of any to signify Him? When the truth was there, what need any more of the shadow? For this was the reason of theirprophesying at all — namely, till the true Righteousness should come, and He that was to ransom the sins of all. And this was why Jerusalem stoodtill then — namely, that there they might be exercised in the types as a preparation for the reality. 3. So when the Holy of Holies had come, naturallyvision and prophecy were sealed and the kingdom of Jerusalem ceased. For kings were to be anointed among them only until the Holy of Holiesshould have been anointed; and Jacob prophesies that the kingdom of the Jews should be established until Him, as follows:— “The rulerGenesis 49:10 shall not fail from Juda, nor the Prince from his loins, until that which is laid up for him shall come; and he is the expectation of thenations.” 4. Whence the Saviour also Himself cried aloud and said: “The law and the prophets prophesied until John.” If then there is now among theJews king or prophet or vision, they do well to deny the Christ that has come. But if there is neither king nor vision, but from that time forth allprophecy is sealed and the city and temple taken, why are they so irreligious and so perverse as to see what has happened, and yet to deny Christ,Who has brought it all to pass? Or why, when they see even heathens deserting their idols, and placing their hope, through Christ, on the God ofIsrael, do they deny Christ, Who was born of the root of Jesse after the ﬂesh and henceforth is King? For if the nations were worshipping some otherGod, and not confessing the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and Moses, then, once more, they would be doing well in alleging that God had notcome. 5. But if the Gentiles are honouring the same God that gave the law to Moses and made the promise to Abraham, and Whose word the Jewsdishonoured — why are they ignorant, or rather why do they choose to ignore, that the Lord foretold by the Scriptures has shone forth upon theworld, and appeared to it in bodily form, as the Scripture said: “The Lord God has shined upon us;” and again: “He sent His Word and healed them;”
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 15/22

===== PAGE 16 =====

and again: “Not a messenger, not an angel, but the Lord Himself saved them?” 6. Their state may be compared to that of one out of his right mind,who sees the earth illumined by the sun, but denies the sun that illumines it. For what more is there for him whom they expect to do, when he hascome? To call the heathen? But they are called already. To make prophecy, and king, and vision to cease? This too has already come to pass. Toexpose the godlessness of idolatry? It is already exposed and condemned. Or to destroy death? He is already destroyed. 7. What then has not come topass, that the Christ must do? What is left unfulﬁlled, that the Jews should now disbelieve with impunity? For if, I say — which is just what weactually see — there is no longer king nor prophet nor Jerusalem nor sacriﬁce nor vision among them, but even the whole earth is ﬁlled with theknowledge of God, and Gentiles, leaving their godlessness, are now taking refuge with the God of Abraham, through the Word, even our Lord JesusChrist, then it must be plain, even to those who are exceedingly obstinate, that the Christ has come, and that He has illumined absolutely all with Hislight, and given them the true and divine teaching concerning His Father. 8. So one can fairly refute the Jews by these and by other arguments fromthe Divine Scriptures.
41. Answer to the Greeks. Do they recognise the Logos? If He manifests Himself in the organismof the Universe, why not in one Body? For a human body is a part of the same whole.
But one cannot but be utterly astonished at the Gentiles, who, while they laugh at what is no matter for jesting, are themselves insensible to their owndisgrace, which they do not see that they have set up in the shape of stocks and stones. 2. Only, as our argument is not lacking in demonstrative proof,come let us put them also to shame on reasonable grounds — mainly from what we ourselves also see. For what is there on our side that is absurd, orworthy of derision? Is it merely our saying that the Word has been made manifest in the body? But this even they will join in owning to havehappened without any absurdity, if they show themselves friends of truth. 3. If then they deny that there is a Word of God at all, they do sogratuitously , jesting at what they know not. 4. But if they confess that there is a Word of God, and He ruler of the universe, and that in Him theFather has produced the creation, and that by His Providence the whole receives light and life and being, and that He reigns over all, so that from theworks of His providence He is known, and through Him the Father — consider, I pray you, whether they be not unwittingly raising the jest againstthemselves. 5. The philosophers of the Greeks say that the universe is a great body ; and rightly so. For we see it and its parts as objects of our senses.If, then, the Word of God is in the Universe, which is a body, and has united Himself with the whole and with all its parts, what is there surprising orabsurd if we say that He has united Himself with man also. 6. For if it were absurd for Him to have been in a body at all, it would be absurd for Himto be united with the whole either, and to be giving light and movement to all things by His providence. For the whole also is a body. 7. But if itbeseems Him to unite Himself with the universe, and to be made known in the whole, it must beseem Him also to appear in a human body, and thatby Him it should be illumined and work. For mankind is part of the whole as well as the rest. And if it be unseemly for a part to have been adopted asHis instrument to teach men of His Godhead, it must be most absurd that He should be made known even by the whole universe.
42. His union with the body is based upon His relation to Creation as a whole. He used a humanbody, since to man it was that He wished to reveal Himself.
For just as, while the whole body is quickened and illumined by man, supposing one said it were absurd that man's power should also be in the toe, hewould be thought foolish; because, while granting that he pervades and works in the whole, he demurs to his being in the part also; thus he whogrants and believes that the Word of God is in the whole Universe, and that the whole is illumined and moved by Him, should not think it absurd thata single human body also should receive movement and light from Him. 2. But if it is because the human race is a thing created and has been madeout of nothing, that they regard that manifestation of the Saviour in man, which we speak of, as not seemly, it is high time for them to eject Him fromcreation also; for it too has been brought into existence by the Word out of nothing. 3. But if, even though creation be a thing made, it is not absurdthat the Word should be in it, then neither is it absurd that He should be in man. For whatever idea they form of the whole, they must necessarilyapply the like idea to the part. For man also, as I said before, is a part of the whole. 4. Thus it is not at all unseemly that the Word should be in man,while all things are deriving from Him their light and movement and light, as also their authors say, “In him we live and move and have our being.” 5.So, then, what is there to scoff at in what we say, if the Word has used that, wherein He is, as an instrument to manifest Himself? For were He not init, neither could He have used it; but if we have previously allowed that He is in the whole and in its parts, what is there incredible in His manifestingHimself in that wherein He is? 6. For by His own power He is united wholly with each and all, and orders all things without stint, so that no onecould have called it out of place for Him to speak, and make known Himself and His Father, by means of sun, if He so willed, or moon, or heaven, orearth, or waters, or ﬁre ; inasmuch as He holds in one all things at once, and is in fact not only in all but also in the part in question, and thereinvisibly manifests Himself. In like manner it cannot be absurd if, ordering as He does the whole, and giving life to all things, and having willed tomake Himself known through men, He has used as His instrument a human body to manifest the truth and knowledge of the Father. For humanity,too, is an actual part of the whole. 7. And as Mind, pervading man all through, is interpreted by a part of the body, I mean the tongue, without any onesaying, I suppose, that the essence of the mind is on that account lowered, so if the Word, pervading all things, has used a human instrument, thiscannot appear unseemly. For, as I have said previously, if it be unseemly to have used a body as an instrument, it is unseemly also for Him to be in theWhole.
43. He came in human rather than in any nobler form, because (I) He came to save, not toimpress ; (2) man alone of creatures had sinned. As men would not recognise His works in theUniverse, He came and worked among them as Man; in the sphere to which they had limitedthemselves.
Now, if they ask, Why then did He not appear by means of other and nobler parts of creation, and use some nobler instrument, as the sun, or moon, orstars, or ﬁre, or air, instead of man merely? Let them know that the Lord came not to make a display, but to heal and teach those who were suffering.2. For the way for one aiming at display would be, just to appear, and to dazzle the beholders; but for one seeking to heal and teach the way is, notsimply to sojourn here, but to give himself to the aid of those in want, and to appear as they who need him can bear it; that he may not, by exceedingthe requirements of the sufferers, trouble the very persons that need him, rendering God's appearance useless to them. 3. Now, nothing in creation hadgone astray with regard to their notions of God, save man only. Why, neither sun, nor moon, nor heaven, nor the stars, nor water, nor air had swervedfrom their order; but knowing their Artiﬁcer and Sovereign, the Word, they remain as they were made. But men alone, having rejected what was
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 16/22

===== PAGE 17 =====

good, then devised things of nought instead of the truth, and have ascribed the honour due to God, and their knowledge of Him, to demons and menin the shape of stones. 4. With reason, then, since it were unworthy of the Divine Goodness to overlook so grave a matter, while yet men were notable to recognise Him as ordering and guiding the whole, He takes to Himself as an instrument a part of the whole, His human body, and unitesHimself with that, in order that since men could not recognise Him in the whole, they should not fail to know Him in the part; and since they couldnot look up to His invisible power, might be able, at any rate, from what resembled themselves to reason to Him and to contemplate Him. 5. For, menas they are, they will be able to know His Father more quickly and directly by a body of like nature and by the divine works wrought through it,judging by comparison that they are not human, but the works of God, which are done by Him. 6. And if it were absurd, as they say, for the Word tobe known through the works of the body, it would likewise be absurd for Him to be known through the works of the universe. For just as He is increation, and yet does not partake of its nature in the least degree, but rather all things partake of His power; so while He used the body as Hisinstrument He partook of no corporeal property, but, on the contrary, Himself sanctiﬁed even the body. 7. For if even Plato, who is in such reputeamong the Greeks, says that its author, beholding the universe tempest-tossed, and in peril of going down to the place of chaos, takes his seat at thehelm of the soul and comes to the rescue and corrects all its calamities; what is there incredible in what we say, that, mankind being in error, the Wordlighted down upon it and appeared as man, that He might save it in its tempest by His guidance and goodness?
44. As God made man by a word, why not restore him by a word? But (1) creation out of nothingis different from reparation of what already exists. (2) Man was there with a deﬁnite need,calling for a deﬁnite remedy. Death was ingrained in man's nature: He then must wind lifeclosely to human nature. Therefore the Word became Incarnate that He might meet and conquerdeath in His usurped territory. (Simile of straw and asbestos.)
But perhaps, shamed into agreeing with this, they will choose to say that God, if He wished to reform and to save mankind, ought to have done so bya mere ﬁat , without His word taking a body, in just the same way as He did formerly, when He produced them out of nothing. 2. To this objection oftheirs a reasonable answer would be: that formerly, nothing being in existence at all, what was needed to make everything was a ﬁat and the bare willto do so. But when man had once been made, and necessity demanded a cure, not for things that were not, but for things that had come to be, it wasnaturally consequent that the Physician and Saviour should appear in what had come to be, in order also to cure the things that were. For this cause,then, He has become man, and used His body as a human instrument. 3. For if this were not the right way, how was the Word, choosing to use aninstrument, to appear? Or whence was He to take it, save from those already in being, and in need of His Godhead by means of one like themselves?For it was not things without being that needed salvation, so that a bare command should sufﬁce, but man, already in existence, was going tocorruption and ruin. It was then natural and right that the Word should use a human instrument and reveal Himself everywhither. 4. Secondly, youmust know this also, that the corruption which had set in was not external to the body, but had become attached to it; and it was required that, insteadof corruption, life should cleave to it; so that, just as death has been engendered in the body, so life may be engendered in it also. 5. Now if death wereexternal to the body, it would be proper for life also to have been engendered externally to it. But if death was wound closely to the body and wasruling over it as though united to it, it was required that life also should be wound closely to the body, that so the body, by putting on life in its stead,should cast off corruption. Besides, even supposing that the Word had come outside the body, and not in it, death would indeed have been defeated byHim, in perfect accordance with nature, inasmuch as death has no power against the Life; but the corruption attached to the body would haveremained in it none the less. 6. For this cause the Saviour reasonably put on Him a body, in order that the body, becoming wound closely to the Life,should no longer, as mortal, abide in death, but, as having put on immortality, should thenceforth rise again and remain immortal. For, once it had puton corruption, it could not have risen again unless it had put on life. And death likewise could not, from its very nature, appear, save in the body.Therefore He put on a body, that He might ﬁnd death in the body, and blot it out. For how could the Lord have been proved at all to be the Life, hadHe not quickened what was mortal? 7. And just as, whereas stubble is naturally destructible by ﬁre, supposing (ﬁrstly) a man keeps ﬁre away from thestubble, though it is not burned, yet the stubble remains, for all that, merely stubble, fearing the threat of the ﬁre — for ﬁre has the natural property ofconsuming it; while if a man (secondly) encloses it with a quantity of asbestos, the substance said to be an antidote to ﬁre, the stubble no longerdreads the ﬁre, being secured by its enclosure in incombustible matter; 8. in this very way one may say, with regard to the body and death, that ifdeath had been kept from the body by a mere command on His part, it would none the less have been mortal and corruptible, according to the natureof bodies; but, that this should not be, it put on the incorporeal Word of God, and thus no longer fears either death or corruption, for it has life as agarment, and corruption is done away in it.
45. Thus once again every part of creation manifests the glory of God. Nature, the witness to herCreator, yields (by miracles) a second testimony to God Incarnate. The witness of Nature,perverted by man's sin, was thus forced back to truth. If these reasons sufﬁce not, let the Greekslook at facts.
Consistently, therefore, the Word of God took a body and has made use of a human instrument, in order to quicken the body also, and as He is knownin creation by His works so to work in man as well, and to show Himself everywhere, leaving nothing void of His own divinity, and of the knowledgeof Him. 2. For I resume, and repeat what I said before, that the Saviour did this in order that, as He ﬁlls all things on all sides by His presence, so alsoHe might ﬁll all things with the knowledge of Him, as the divine Scripture also says : “The whole earth was ﬁlled with the knowledge of the Lord.” 3.For if a man will but look up to heaven, he sees its Order, or if he cannot raise his face to heaven, but only to man, he sees His power, beyondcomparison with that of men, shown by His works, and learns that He alone among men is God the Word. Or if a man is gone astray among demons,and is in fear of them, he may see this man drive them out, and make up his mind that He is their Master. Or if a man has sunk to the waters , andthinks that they are God — as the Egyptians, for instance, reverence the water — he may see its nature changed by Him, and learn that the Lord isCreator of the waters. 4. But if a man is gone down even to Hades, and stands in awe of the heroes who have descended there, regarding them asgods, yet he may see the fact of Christ's Resurrection and victory over death, and infer that among them also Christ alone is true God and Lord. 5. Forthe Lord touched all parts of creation, and freed and undeceived all of them from every illusion; as Paul says: “Having Colossians 2:15 put off fromHimself the principalities and the powers, He triumphed on the Cross:” that no one might by any possibility be any longer deceived, but everywheremight ﬁnd the true Word of God. 6. For thus man, shut in on every side , and beholding the divinity of the Word unfolded everywhere, that is, inheaven, in Hades, in man, upon earth, is no longer exposed to deceit concerning God, but is to worship Christ alone, and through Him come rightly to
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 17/22

===== PAGE 18 =====

know the Father. 7. By these arguments, then, on grounds of reason, the Gentiles in their turn will fairly be put to shame by us. But if they deem thearguments insufﬁcient to shame them, let them be assured of what we are saying at any rate by facts obvious to the sight of all.
46. Discredit, from the date of the Incarnation, of idol-cultus, oracles, mythologies, demoniacalenergy, magic, and Gentile philosophy. And whereas the old cults were strictly local andindependent, the worship of Christ is catholic and uniform.
When did men begin to desert the worshipping of idols, save since God, the true Word of God, has come among men? Or when have the oraclesamong the Greeks, and everywhere, ceased and become empty, save when the Saviour has manifested Himself upon earth? 2. Or when did those whoare called gods and heroes in the poets begin to be convicted of being merely mortal men , save since the Lord erected His conquest of death, andpreserved incorruptible the body he had taken, raising it from the dead? 3. Or when did the deceitfulness and madness of demons fall into contempt,save when the power of God, the Word, the Master of all these as well, condescending because of man's weakness, appeared on earth? Or when didthe art and the schools of magic begin to be trodden down, save when the divine manifestation of the Word took place among men? 4. And, in a word,at what time has the wisdom of the Greeks become foolish, save when the true Wisdom of God manifested itself on earth? For formerly the wholeworld and every place was led astray by the worshipping of idols, and men regarded nothing else but the idols as gods. But now, all the world over,men are deserting the superstition of the idols, and taking refuge with Christ; and, worshipping Him as God, are by His means coming to know thatFather also Whom they knew not. 5. And, marvellous fact, whereas the objects of worship were various and of vast number, and each place had itsown idol, and he who was accounted a god among them had no power to pass over to the neighbouring place, so as to persuade those of neighbouringpeoples to worship him, but was barely served even among his own people; for no one else worshipped his neighbour's god — on the contrary, eachman kept to his own idol , thinking it to be lord of all — Christ alone is worshipped as one and the same among all peoples; and what the weakness ofthe idols could not do — to persuade, namely, even those dwelling close at hand — this Christ has done, persuading not only those close at hand, butsimply the entire world, to worship one and the same Lord, and through Him God, even His Father.
47. The numerous oracles — fancied apparitions in sacred places, etc., dispelled by the sign ofthe Cross. The old gods prove to have been mere men. Magic is exposed. And whereasPhilosophy could only persuade select and local cliques of Immortality, and goodness — men oflittle intellect have infused into the multitudes of the churches the principle of a supernaturallife.
And whereas formerly every place was full of the deceit of the oracles , and the oracles at Delphi and Dodona, and in Bœotia and Lycia and Libyaand Egypt and those of the Cabiri , and the Pythoness, were held in repute by men's imagination, now, since Christ has begun to be preachedeverywhere, their madness also has ceased and there is none among them to divine any more. 2. And whereas formerly demons used to deceive men'sfancy, occupying springs or rivers, trees or stones, and thus imposed upon the simple by their juggleries; now, after the divine visitation of the Word,their deception has ceased. For by the Sign of the Cross, though a man but use it, he drives out their deceits. 3. And while formerly men held to begods the Zeus and Cronos and Apollo and the heroes mentioned in the poets, and went astray in honouring them; now that the Saviour has appearedamong men, those others have been exposed as mortal men , and Christ alone has been recognised among men as the true God, the Word of God. 4.And what is one to say of the magic esteemed among them? That before the Word sojourned among us this was strong and active among Egyptians,and Chaldees, and Indians, and inspired awe in those who saw it; but that by the presence of the Truth, and the Appearing of the Word, it also hasbeen thoroughly confuted, and brought wholly to nought. 5. But as to Gentile wisdom, and the sounding pretensions of the philosophers, I think nonecan need our argument, since the wonder is before the eyes of all, that while the wise among the Greeks had written so much, and were unable topersuade even a few from their own neighbourhood, concerning immortality and a virtuous life, Christ alone, by ordinary language, and by men notclever with the tongue, has throughout all the world persuaded whole churches full of men to despise death, and to mind the things of immortality; tooverlook what is temporal and to turn their eyes to what is eternal; to think nothing of earthly glory and to strive only for the heavenly.
48. Further facts. Christiancontinence of virgins and ascetics. Martyrs. The power of the Crossagainst demonsand magic. Christ by His Power shows Himself more than a man, more than amagician, more than a spirit. For all these are totally subject to Him. Therefore He is the Wordof God.
Now these arguments of ours do not amount merely to words, but have in actual experience a witness to their truth. 2. For let him that will, go up andbehold the proof of virtue in the virgins of Christ and in the young men that practise holy chastity , and the assurance of immortality in so great aband of His martyrs. 3. And let him come who would test by experience what we have now said, and in the very presence of the deceit of demons andthe imposture of oracles and the marvels of magic, let him use the Sign of that Cross which is laughed at among them, and he shall see how by itsmeans demons ﬂy, oracles cease, all magic and witchcraft is brought to nought. 4. Who, then, and how great is this Christ, Who by His own Nameand Presence casts into the shade and brings to nought all things on every side, and is alone strong against all, and has ﬁlled the whole world with Histeaching? Let the Greeks tell us, who are pleased to laugh, and blush not. 5. For if He is a man, how then has one man exceeded the power of allwhom even themselves bold to be gods, and convicted them by His own power of being nothing? But if they call Him a magician, how can it be thatby a magician all magic is destroyed, instead of being conﬁrmed? For if He conquered particular magicians, or prevailed over one only, it would beproper for them to hold that He excelled the rest by superior skill; 6. but if His Cross has won the victory over absolutely all magic, and over the veryname of it, it must be plain that the Saviour is not a magician, seeing that even those demons who are invoked by the other magicians ﬂy from Him astheir Master. 7. Who He is, then, let the Greeks tell us, whose only serious pursuit is jesting. Perhaps they might say that He, too, was a demon, andhence His strength. But say this as they will, they will have the laugh against them, for they can once more be put to shame by our former proofs. Forhow is it possible that He should be a demon who drives the demons out? 8. For if He simply drove out particular demons, it might properly be heldthat by the chief of demons He prevailed against the lesser, just as the Jews said to Him when they wished to insult Him. But if, by His Name being
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 18/22

===== PAGE 19 =====

named, all madness of the demons is uprooted and chased away, it must be evident that here, too, they are wrong, and that our Lord and SaviourChrist is not, as they think, some demoniacal power. 9. Then, if the Saviour is neither a man simply, nor a magician, nor some demon, but has by Hisown Godhead brought to nought and cast into the shade both the doctrine found in the poets and the delusion of the demons and the wisdom of theGentiles, it must be plain and will be owned by all, that this is the true Son of God, even the Word and Wisdom and Power of the Father from thebeginning. For this is why His works also are no works of man, but are recognised to be above man, and truly God's works, both from the facts inthemselves, and from comparison with [the rest of] mankind.
49. His Birth and Miracles. You call Asclepius, Heracles, and Dionysus gods for their works.Contrast their works with His, and the wonders at His death, etc.
For what man, that ever was born, formed a body for himself from a virgin alone? Or what man ever healed such diseases as the common Lord of all?Or who has restored what was wanting to man's nature, and made one blind from his birth to see? 2. Asclepius was deiﬁed among them, because hepractised medicine and found out herbs for bodies that were sick; not forming them himself out of the earth, but discovering them by science drawnfrom nature. But what is this to what was done by the Saviour, in that, instead of healing a wound, He modiﬁed a man's original nature, and restoredthe body whole. 3. Heracles is worshipped as a god among the Greeks because he fought against men, his peers, and destroyed wild beasts by guile.What is this to what was done by the Word, in driving away from man diseases and demons and death itself? Dionysus is worshipped among thembecause he has taught man drunkenness; but the true Saviour and Lord of all, for teaching temperance, is mocked by these people. 4. But let thesematters pass. What will they say to the other miracles of His Godhead? At what man's death was the sun darkened and the earth shaken? Lo even tothis day men are dying, and they died also of old. When did any such-like wonder happen in their case? 5. Or, to pass over the deeds done through Hisbody, and mention those after its rising again: what man's doctrine that ever was has prevailed everywhere, one and the same, from one end of theearth to the other, so that his worship has winged its way through every land? 6. Or why, if Christ is, as they say, a man, and not God the Word, is notHis worship prevented by the gods they have from passing into the same land where they are? Or why on the contrary does the Word Himself,sojourning here, by His teaching stop their worship and put their deception to shame?
50. Impotence and rivalries of the Sophists put to shame by the Death of Christ. His Resurrectionunparalleled even in Greek legend.
Many before this Man have been kings and tyrants of the world, many are on record who have been wise men and magicians, among the Chaldæansand Egyptians and Indians; which of these, I say, not after death, but while still alive, was ever able so far to prevail as to ﬁll the whole earth with histeaching and reform so great a multitude from the superstition of idols, as our Saviour has brought over from idols to Himself? 2. The philosophers ofthe Greeks have composed many works with plausibility and verbal skill; what result, then, have they exhibited so great as has the Cross of Christ?For the reﬁnements they taught were plausible enough till they died; but even the inﬂuence they seemed to have while alive was subject to theirmutual rivalries; and they were emulous, and declaimed against one another. 3. But the Word of God, most strange fact, teaching in meaner language,has cast into the shade the choice sophists; and while He has, by drawing all to Himself, brought their schools to nought, He has ﬁlled His ownchurches; and the marvellous thing is, that by going down as man to death, He has brought to nought the sounding utterances of the wise concerningidols. 4. For whose death ever drove out demons? Or whose death did demons ever fear, as they did that of Christ? For where the Saviour's name isnamed, there every demon is driven out. Or who has so rid men of the passions of the natural man, that whoremongers are chaste, and murderers nolonger hold the sword, and those who were formerly mastered by cowardice play the man? 5. And, in short, who persuaded men of barbarouscountries and heathen men in various places to lay aside their madness, and to mind peace, if it be not the Faith of Christ and the Sign of the Cross?Or who else has given men such assurance of immortality, as has the Cross of Christ, and the Resurrection of His Body? 6. For although the Greekshave told all manner of false tales, yet they were not able to feign a Resurrection of their idols — for it never crossed their mind, whether it be at allpossible for the body again to exist after death. And here one would most especially accept their testimony, inasmuch as by this opinion they haveexposed the weakness of their own idolatry, while leaving the possibility open to Christ, so that hence also He might be made known among all asSon of God.
51. The new virtue of continence. Revolution of Society, puriﬁed and paciﬁed by Christianity.
Which of mankind, again, after his death, or else while living, taught concerning virginity, and that this virtue was not impossible among men? ButChrist, our Saviour and King of all, had such power in His teaching concerning it, that even children not yet arrived at the lawful age vow thatvirginity which lies beyond the law. 2. What man has ever yet been able to pass so far as to come among Scythians and Ethiopians, or Persians orArmenians or Goths, or those we hear of beyond the ocean or those beyond Hyrcania, or even the Egyptians and Chaldees, men that mind magic andare superstitious beyond nature and savage in their ways, and to preach at all about virtue and self-control, and against the worshipping of idols, ashas the Lord of all, the Power of God, our Lord Jesus Christ? 3. Who not only preached by means of His own disciples, but also carried persuasion tomen's mind, to lay aside the ﬁerceness of their manners, and no longer to serve their ancestral gods, but to learn to know Him, and through Him toworship the Father. 4. For formerly, while in idolatry, Greeks and Barbarians used to war against each other, and were actually cruel to their own kin.For it was impossible for any one to cross sea or land at all, without arming the hand with swords , because of their implacable ﬁghting amongthemselves. 5. For the whole course of their life was carried on by arms, and the sword with them took the place of a staff, and was their support inevery emergency; and still, as I said before, they were serving idols, and offering sacriﬁces to demons, while for all their idolatrous superstition theycould not be reclaimed from this spirit. 6. But when they have come over to the school of Christ, then, strangely enough, as men truly pricked inconscience, they have laid aside the savagery of their murders and no longer mind the things of war: but all is at peace with them, and fromhenceforth what makes for friendship is to their liking.
52. Wars, etc., roused by demons, lulled by Christianity.
Who then is He that has done this, or who is He that has united in peace men that hated one another, save the beloved Son of the Father, the commonSaviour of all, even Jesus Christ, Who by His own love underwent all things for our salvation? For even from of old it was prophesied of the peaceHe was to usher in, where the Scripture says: “They Isaiah 2:4 shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their pikes into sickles, and nation shall
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 19/22

===== PAGE 20 =====

not take the sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” 2. And this is at least not incredible, inasmuch as even now those barbarianswho have an innate savagery of manners, while they still sacriﬁce to the idols of their country, are mad against one another, and cannot endure to be asingle hour without weapons: 3. but when they hear the teaching of Christ, straightway instead of ﬁghting they turn to husbandry, and instead ofarming their hands with weapons they raise them in prayer, and in a word, in place of ﬁghting among themselves, henceforth they arm against thedevil and against evil spirits, subduing these by self-restraint and virtue of soul. 4. Now this is at once a proof of the divinity of the Saviour, sincewhat men could not learn among idols they have learned from Him; and no small exposure of the weakness and nothingness of demons and idols. Fordemons, knowing their own weakness, for this reason formerly set men to make war against one another, lest, if they ceased from mutual strife, theyshould turn to battle against demons. 5. Why, they who become disciples of Christ, instead of warring with each other, stand arrayed against demonsby their habits and their virtuous actions: and they rout them, and mock at their captain the devil; so that in youth they are self-restrained, intemptations endure, in labours persevere, when insulted are patient, when robbed make light of it: and, wonderful as it is, they despise even death andbecome martyrs of Christ.
53. The whole fabric of Gentilism levelled at a blow by Christ secretly addressing the conscienceof Man.
And to mention one proof of the divinity of the Saviour, which is indeed utterly surprising — what mere man or magician or tyrant or king was everable by himself to engage with so many, and to ﬁght the battle against all idolatry and the whole demoniacal host and all magic, and all the wisdom ofthe Greeks, while they were so strong and still ﬂourishing and imposing upon all, and at one onset to check them all, as was our Lord, the true Wordof God, Who, invisibly exposing each man's error, is by Himself bearing off all men from them all, so that while they who were worshipping idolsnow trample upon them, those in repute for magic burn their books, and the wise prefer to all studies the interpretation of the Gospels? 2. For whomthey used to worship, them they are deserting, and Whom they used to mock as one cruciﬁed, Him they worship as Christ, confessing Him to be God.And they that are called gods among them are routed by the Sign of the Cross, while the Cruciﬁed Saviour is proclaimed in all the world as God andthe Son of God. And the gods worshipped among the Greeks are falling into ill repute at their hands, as scandalous beings; while those who receivethe teaching of Christ live a chaster life than they. 3. If, then, these and the like are human works, let him who will point out similar works on the partof men of former time, and so convince us. But if they prove to be, and are, not men's works, but God's, why are the unbelievers so irreligious as notto recognise the Master that wrought them? 4. For their case is as though a man, from the works of creation, failed to know God their Artiﬁcer. For ifthey knew His Godhead from His power over the universe, they would have known that the bodily works of Christ also are not human, but are theworks of the Saviour of all, the Word of God. And did they thus know, “they would not,” as Paul said 1 Corinthians 2:8, “have cruciﬁed the Lord ofglory.”
54. The Word Incarnate, as is the case with the Invisible God, is known to us by His works. Bythem we recognise His deifying mission. Let us be content to enumerate a few of them, leavingtheir dazzling plentitude to him who will behold.
As, then, if a man should wish to see God, Who is invisible by nature and not seen at all, he may know and apprehend Him from His works: so lethim who fails to see Christ with his understanding, at least apprehend Him by the works of His body, and test whether they be human works or God'sworks. 2. And if they be human, let him scoff; but if they are not human, but of God, let him recognise it, and not laugh at what is no matter forscofﬁng; but rather let him marvel that by so ordinary a means things divine have been manifested to us, and that by death immortality has reached toall, and that by the Word becoming man, the universal Providence has been known, and its Giver and Artiﬁcer the very Word of God. 3. For He wasmade man that we might be made God ; and He manifested Himself by a body that we might receive the idea of the unseen Father; and He enduredthe insolence of men that we might inherit immortality. For while He Himself was in no way injured, being impassible and incorruptible and veryWord and God, men who were suffering, and for whose sakes He endured all this, He maintained and preserved in His own impassibility. 4. And, in aword, the achievements of the Saviour, resulting from His becoming man, are of such kind and number, that if one should wish to enumerate them, hemay be compared to men who gaze at the expanse of the sea and wish to count its waves. For as one cannot take in the whole of the waves with hiseyes, for those which are coming on bafﬂe the sense of him that attempts it; so for him that would take in all the achievements of Christ in the body, itis impossible to take in the whole, even by reckoning them up, as those which go beyond his thought are more than those he thinks he has taken in. 5.Better is it, then, not to aim at speaking of the whole, where one cannot do justice even to a part, but, after mentioning one more, to leave the wholefor you to marvel at. For all alike are marvellous, and wherever a man turns his glance, he may behold on that side the divinity of the Word, and bestruck with exceeding great awe.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 20/22

===== PAGE 21 =====

55. Summary of foregoing. Cessation of pagan oracles, etc.: propagation of the faith. The trueKing has come forth and silenced all usurpers.
This, then, after what we have so far said, it is right for you to realize, and to take as the sum of what we have already stated, and to marvel atexceedingly; namely, that since the Saviour has come among us, idolatry not only has no longer increased, but what there was is diminishing andgradually coming to an end: and not only does the wisdom of the Greeks no longer advance, but what there is is now fading away: and demons, so farfrom cheating any more by illusions and prophecies and magic arts, if they so much as dare to make the attempt, are put to shame by the sign of theCross. 2. And to sum the matter up: behold how the Saviour's doctrine is everywhere increasing, while all idolatry and everything opposed to the faithof Christ is daily dwindling, and losing power, and falling. And thus beholding, worship the Saviour, “Who is above all” and mighty, even God theWord; and condemn those who are being worsted and done away by Him. 3. For as, when the sun has come, darkness no longer prevails, but if any bestill left anywhere it is driven away; so, now that the divine Appearing of the Word of God has come, the darkness of the idols prevails no more, andall parts of the world in every direction are illumined by His teaching. 4. And as, when a king is reigning in some country without appearing but keepsat home in his own house, often some disorderly persons, abusing his retirement, proclaim themselves; and each of them, by assuming the character,imposes on the simple as king, and so men are led astray by the name, hearing that there is a king, but not seeing him, if for no other reason, becausethey cannot enter the house; but when the real king comes forth and appears, then the disorderly impostors are exposed by his presence, while men,seeing the real king, desert those who previously led them astray: 5. in like manner, the evil spirits formerly used to deceive men, investingthemselves with God's honour; but when the Word of God appeared in a body, and made known to us His own Father, then at length the deceit of theevil spirits is done away and stopped, while men, turning their eyes to the true God, Word of the Father, are deserting the idols, and now coming toknow the true God. 6. Now this is a proof that Christ is God the Word, and the Power of God. For whereas human things cease, and the Word ofChrist abides, it is clear to all eyes that what ceases is temporary, but that He Who abides is God, and the true Son of God, His only-begotten Word.
56. Search then, the Scriptures, if you can, and so ﬁll up this sketch. Learn to look for theSecond Advent and Judgment.
Let this, then, Christ-loving man, be our offering to you, just for a rudimentary sketch and outline, in a short compass, of the faith of Christ and of HisDivine appearing to usward. But you, taking occasion by this, if you light upon the text of the Scriptures, by genuinely applying your mind to them,will learn from them more completely and clearly the exact detail of what we have said. 2. For they were spoken and written by God, through menwho spoke of God. But we impart of what we have learned from inspired teachers who have been conversant with them, who have also becomemartyrs for the deity of Christ, to your zeal for learning, in turn. 3. And you will also learn about His second glorious and truly divine appearing to us,when no longer in lowliness, but in His own glory — no longer in humble guise, but in His own magniﬁcence — He is to come, no more to suffer,but thenceforth to render to all the fruit of His own Cross, that is, the resurrection and incorruption; and no longer to be judged, but to judge all, bywhat each has done in the body, whether good or evil; where there is laid up for the good the kingdom of heaven, but for them that have done evileverlasting ﬁre and outer darkness. 4. For thus the Lord Himself also says: “Henceforth Matthew 26:64 you shall see the Son of Man sitting at theright hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven in the glory of the Father.” 5. And for this very reason there is also a word of the Saviour toprepare us for that day, in these words: “Be ready and watch, for He comes at an hour you know not.” For, according to the blessed Paul: “We mustall stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, that each one may receive according as he has done in the body, whether it be good or bad.”
57. Above all, so live that you may have the right to eat of this tree of knowledgeand life, and socome to eternal joys. Doxology.
But for the searching of the Scriptures and true knowledge of them, an honourable life is needed, and a pure soul, and that virtue which is accordingto Christ; so that the intellect guiding its path by it, may be able to attain what it desires, and to comprehend it, in so far as it is accessible to humannature to learn concerning the Word of God. 2. For without a pure mind and a modelling of the life after the saints, a man could not possiblycomprehend the words of the saints. 3. For just as, if a man wished to see the light of the sun, he would at any rate wipe and brighten his eye,purifying himself in some sort like what he desires, so that the eye, thus becoming light, may see the light of the sun; or as, if a man would see a cityor country, he at any rate comes to the place to see it — thus he that would comprehend the mind of those who speak of God must needs begin bywashing and cleansing his soul, by his manner of living, and approach the saints themselves by imitating their works; so that, associated with them inthe conduct of a common life, he may understand also what has been revealed to them by God, and thenceforth, as closely knit to them, may escapethe peril of the sinners and their ﬁre at the day of judgment, and receive what is laid up for the saints in the kingdom of heaven, which “Eye has notseen 1 Corinthians 2:9, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,” whatsoever things are prepared for them that live a virtuous life,and love the God and Father, in Christ Jesus our Lord: through Whom and with Whom be to the Father Himself, with the Son Himself, in the HolySpirit, honour and might and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
About this page
Source. Translated by Archibald Robertson. From Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series, Vol. 4. Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace.(Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co., 1892.) Revised and edited for New Advent by Kevin Knight.<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm>.
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 21/22

===== PAGE 22 =====

Contact information. The editor of New Advent is Kevin Knight. My email address is feedback732 at newadvent.org. (To help ﬁght spam, thisaddress might change occasionally.) Regrettably, I can't reply to every letter, but I greatly appreciate your feedback — especially notiﬁcations abouttypographical errors and inappropriate ads.Copyright © 2023 by New Advent LLC. Dedicated to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.
CONTACT US | ADVERTISE WITH NEW ADVENT
11/29/25, 2:42 AM CHURCH FATHERS: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)
https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/2802.htm 22/22