

===== PAGE 1 =====

RECENT |  |CATEGORIES
Observer Theory PODCAST VIDEO
Observer Theory
December 11, 2023
The Concept of the Observer
We call it perception. We call it measurement. We call it analysis. But
in the end it’s about how we take the world as it is, and derive from it
the impression of it that we have in our minds.
We might have thought that we could do science “purely objectively” without any
reference to observers or their nature. But what we’ve discovered particularly
dramatically in our Physics Project is that the nature of us as observers is critical
even in determining the most fundamental laws we attribute to the universe.
But what ultimately does an observer—say like us—do? And how can we make a
theoretical framework for it? Much as we have a general model for the process of
computation—instantiated by something like a Turing machine—we’d like to
have a general model for the process of observation: a general “observer theory”.
Central to what we think of as an observer is the notion that the observer will take
the raw complexity of the world and extract from it some reduced representation
suitable for a finite mind. There might be zillions of photons impinging on our
eyes, but all we extract is the arrangement of objects in a visual scene. Or there
might be zillions of gas molecules impinging on a piston, yet all we extract is the
overall pressure of the gas.
Contents
 
  ≡     
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 1/35

===== PAGE 2 =====

In the end, we can think of it fundamentally as being about equivalencing. There
are immense numbers of different individual configurations for the photons or
the gas molecules—that are all treated as equivalent by an observer who’s just
picking out the particular features needed for some reduced representation.
There’s in a sense a certain duality between computation and observation. In
computation one’s generating new states of a system. In observation, one’s
equivalencing together different states.
That equivalencing must in the end be implemented “underneath” by
computation. But in observer theory what we want to do is just characterize the
equivalencing that’s achieved. For us as observers it might in practice be all about
how our senses work, what our biological or cultural nature is—or what
technological devices or structures we’ve built. But what makes a coherent
concept of observer theory possible is that there seem to be general, abstract
characterizations that capture the essence of different kinds of observers.
It’s not immediately obvious that anything suitable for a finite mind could ever be
extracted from the complexity of the world. And indeed the Principle of
Computational Equivalence implies that computational irreducibility (and its
multicomputational generalization) will be ubiquitous. But within computational
irreducibility there must always be slices of computational reducibility. And it’s
these slices of reducibility that an observer must try to pick out—and that
ultimately make it possible for a finite mind to develop a “useful narrative” about
what happens in the world, that allows it to make decisions, predictions, and so
on.
How “special” is what an observer does? At its core it’s just about taking a large
set of possible inputs, and returning a much smaller set of possible outputs. And
certainly that’s a conceptual idea that’s appeared in many fields under many
different names: a contractive mapping, reduction to canonical form, a classifier,
an acceptor, a forgetful functor, evolving to an attractor, extracting statistics,
model fitting, lossy compression, projection, phase transitions, renormalization
group transformations, coarse graining and so on. But here we want to think not
about what’s “mathematically describable”, but instead about what in general is
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 2/35

===== PAGE 3 =====

actually implemented—say by our senses, our measuring devices, or our ways of
analyzing things.
At an ultimate level, everything that happens can be thought of as being captured
by the ruliad—the unique object that emerges as the entangled limit of all
possible computations. And in a vast generalization of ideas like that our brains—
like any other material thing—are made of atoms, so too any observer must be
embedded as some kind of structure within the ruliad. But a key concept of
observer theory is that it’s possible to make conclusions about an observer’s
impression of the world just by knowing about the capabilities—and assumptions
—of the observer, without knowing in detail what the observer is “like inside”.
And so it is, for example, that in our Physics Project we seem to be able to derive
—essentially from the structure of the ruliad—the core laws of twentieth-century
physics (general relativity, quantum mechanics and the Second Law) just on the
basis of two features of us as observers: that we’re computationally bounded, and
that we believe we’re persistent in time (even though “underneath” we’re made of
different atoms of space at every successive moment). And we can expect that if
we were to include other features of us as observers (for example, that we believe
there are persistent objects in the world, or that we believe we have free will) then
we’d be able to derive more aspects of the universe as we experience it—or of
natural laws we attribute to it.
But the notion of observers—and observer theory—isn’t limited purely to
“physical observers”. It applies whenever we try to “get an impression” of
something. And so, for example, we can also operate as “mathematical
observers”, sampling the ruliad to build up conclusions about mathematical laws.
Some features of us as physical observers—like the computational boundedness
associated with the finiteness of our minds—inevitably carry over to us as
mathematical observers. But other features do not. But the point of observer
theory is to provide a general framework in which we can characterize observers
—and then see the consequences of those characterizations for the impressions or
conclusions observers will form.
The Operation of Observers
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 3/35

===== PAGE 4 =====

As humans we have senses like sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell and
balance. And through our technology we also have access to a few
thousand other kinds of measurements. So how basically do all these
work?
The vast majority in effect aggregate a large number of small inputs to generate
some kind of “average” output—which in the case of measurements is often
specified as a (real) number. In a few cases, however, there’s instead a discrete
choice between outputs that’s made on the basis of whether the total input
exceeds a threshold (think: distributed consensus schemes, weighing balances,
etc.)
But in all cases what’s fundamentally happening is that lots of different input
configurations are all being equivalenced—or, more operationally, the dynamics
of the system essentially make all equivalenced states evolve to the same
“attractor state”.
As an example, let’s consider measuring the pressure of a gas. There are various
ways to do this. But a very direct one is just to have a piston, and see how much
force is exerted by the gas on this piston. So where does this force come from? At
the lowest level it’s the result of lots of individual molecules bouncing off the
surface of the piston, each transferring a tiny amount of momentum to it. If we
looked at the piston at an atomic scale, we’d see it temporarily deform from each
molecular impact. But the crucial point is that at a large scale the piston moves
together, as a single rigid object—aggregating the effects of all those individual
molecular impacts.
But why does it work this way? Essentially it’s because the intermolecular forces
inside the piston are much stronger than the forces associated with molecules in
the gas. Or, put more abstractly, there’s more coupling and coherence “inside the
observer” than between the observer and what it’s observing.
We see the same basic pattern over and over again. There’s some form of
transduction that couples the individual elements of what’s being observed to the
observer. Then “within the observer” there’s something that in essence
aggregates all these small effects. Sometimes that aggregation is “directly
numerical”, as in the addition of lots of small momentum transfers. But
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 4/35

===== PAGE 5 =====

sometimes it’s instead more explicitly like evolution to one attractor rather than
another.
Consider, for example, the case of vision. An array of photons fall on the
photoreceptor cells on our retinas, generating electrical signals transmitted
through nerve fibers to our brains. Within the brain there’s then effectively a
neural net that evolves to different attractors depending on what one’s looking at.
Most of the time a small change in input image won’t affect what attractor one
evolves to. But—much like with a weighing balance—there’s an “edge” at which
even a small change can lead to a different output.
One can go through lots of different types of sensory systems and measuring
devices. But the basic outline seems to always be the same. First, there’s a
coupling between what is being sensed or measured and the thing that’s doing
the sensing or measuring. Quite often that coupling involves transducing from
one physical form to another—say from light to electricity, or from force to
position. Sometimes then the crucial step of equivalencing different detailed
inputs is achieved by simple “numerical aggregation”, most often by
accumulation of objects (atoms, raindrops, etc.) or physical effects (forces,
currents, etc.). But sometimes the equivalencing is instead achieved by a more
obviously dynamical process.
It could amount to simple amplification, in which, say, the presence of a small
element of input (say an individual particle) “tips over” some metastable system
so that it goes into a certain final state. Or it could be more like a neural net
where there’s a more complicated translation defined by hard-to-describe
borders between basins of attraction leading to different attractors.
But, OK, so what’s the endpoint of a process of observation? Ultimately for us
humans it’s an impression created in our minds. Of course that gets into lots of
slippery philosophical issues. Yes, each of us has an “inner experience” of what’s
going on in our mind. But anything else is ultimately an extrapolation. We make
the assumption that other human minds also “see what we see”, but we can never
“feel it from the inside”.
We can of course make increasingly detailed measurements—say of neural
activity—to see how similar what’s going on is between one brain and another.
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 5/35

===== PAGE 6 =====

But as soon as there’s the slightest structural—or situational—difference between
the brains, we really can’t say exactly how their “impressions” will compare.
But for our purposes in constructing a general “observer theory” we’re basically
going to make the assumption (or, in effect, “philosophical approximation”) that
whenever a system does enough equivalencing, that’s tantamount to it “acting
like an observer”, because it can then act as a “front end” that takes the
“incoherent complexity of the world” and “collimates it” to the point where a
mind will derive a definite impression from it.
Of course, there’s still a lot of subtlety here. There has to be “just enough
equivalencing” and not too much. For example, if all inputs were always
equivalenced to the same output, there’d be nothing useful observed. And in the
end there’s somehow got to be some kind of match between the compression of
input achieved by equivalencing, and the “capacity” of the mind that’s ultimately
deriving an impression from it.
A crucial feature of anything that can reasonably be called a mind is that
“something’s got to be going on in there”. It can’t be, for example, that the
internal state of the system is fixed. There has to be some internal dynamics—
some computational process that we can identify as the ongoing operation of the
mind.
At an informational level we might say that there has to be more information
processing going on inside than there is flow of information from the outside. Or,
in other words, if we’re going to be meaningful “observers like us” we can’t just be
bombarded by input we don’t process; we have to have some capability to “think
about what we’re seeing”.
All of this comes back to the idea that a crucial feature of us as observers is that
we are computationally bounded. We do computation; that’s why we can have an
“inner sense of things going on”. But the amount of computation we do is tiny
compared to the computation going on in the world around us. Our experience
represents a heavily filtered version of “what’s happening outside”. And the
essence of “being an observer like us” is that we’re effectively doing lots of
equivalencing to get to that filtered version.
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 6/35

===== PAGE 7 =====

But can we imagine a future in which we “expand our minds”? Or perhaps
encounter some alien intelligence with a fundamentally “less constrained mind”?
Well, at some point there’s an issue with this. Because in a sense the idea that we
have a coherent existence relies on us having “limited minds”. For without such
constraints there wouldn’t be a coherent “self” that we could identify—with
coherent inner experience.
Let’s say we’re shown some system—say in nature—“from the outside”. Can we
tell if “there’s an observer in there”? Ultimately not, because in a sense we’d have
to be “inside that observer” and be able to experience the impression of the world
that it’s getting. But in much the same way as we extrapolate to believing that,
say, other human minds are experiencing things like we’re experiencing, so also
we can potentially extrapolate to say what we might think of as an observer.
And the core idea seems to be that an “observer” should be a subsystem whose
“internal states” are affected by the rest of the system, but where many “external
states” lead to the same internal state—and where there is rich dynamics “within
the observer” that in effect operates only on its internal states. Ultimately—
following the Principle of Computational Equivalence—both the outside and the
inside of the “observer subsystem” can be expected to be equivalent in the
computations they’re performing. But the point is that the coupling from outside
the subsystem to inside effectively “coarse grains” what’s outside, so that the
“inner computation” is operating on a much-reduced set of elements.
Why should any such “observer subsystems” exist? Presumably at some level it’s
inevitable from the presence of pockets of computational reducibility within
arbitrary computationally irreducible systems. But more important for us is that
our very existence—and the possibility of our coherent inner experience—
depends on us “operating as observers”. And—almost as a “self-fulfilling
prophecy”—our behavior tends to perpetuate our ability to successfully do this.
For example, we can think of us as choosing to put ourselves in situations and
environments where we can “predict what’s going to happen” well enough to
“survive as observers”. (At a mundane practical level we might do this by not
living in places subject to unpredictable natural forces—or by doing things like
building ourselves structures that shelter us from those forces.)
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 7/35

===== PAGE 8 =====

We’ve talked about observers operating by compressing the complexities of the
world to “inner impressions” suitable for finite minds. And in typical situations
that we describe as perception and measurement, the main way this happens is
by fairly direct equivalencing of different states. But in a sense there’s a higher-
level story that relies on formalization—and in essence computation—and that’s
what we usually call “analysis”.
Let’s say we have some intricate structure—perhaps some nested, fractal pattern.
A direct rendering of all the pixels in this pattern ultimately won’t be something
well suited for a “finite mind”. But if we gave rules—or a program—for generating
the pattern we’d have a much more succinct representation of it.
But now there’s a problem with computational irreducibility. Yes, the rules
determine the pattern. But to get from these rules to the actual pattern can
require an irreducible amount of computation. And to “reverse engineer the
pattern” to find the rules can require even more computation.
Yes, there are particular cases—like repetitive and simple nested patterns—where
there’s enough immediate computational reducibility that a computationally
bounded system (or observer) can fairly easily “do the analysis” and “get the
compression”. But in general it’s hard. And indeed in a sense it’s the whole
mission of science to pick away at the problem, and try to find more ways to
“reduce the complexities of the world” to “human-level narratives”.
Computational irreducibility limits the extent to which this can be successful. But
the inevitable existence of pockets of reducibility even within computational
irreducibility guarantees that progress can always in principle be made. As we
invent more kinds of measuring devices we can extend our domain as observers.
And the same is true when we invent more methods of analysis, or identify more
principles in science.
But the overall picture remains the same: what’s crucial to “being an observer” is
equivalencing many “states of the world”, either through perceiving or measuring
only specific aspects of them, or through identifying “simplified narratives” that
capture them. (In effect, perception and measurement tend to do “lossy
compression”; analysis is more about “lossless compression” where the
11/29/25, 3:08 AM Observer Theory—Stephen Wolfram Writings
https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/12/observer-theory/ 8/35